Development and validation of a conceptual multiple-choice
survey instrument to assess student understanding of
introductory thermodynamics
Mary Jane Brundage and Chandralekha Singh
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
Abstract.
We discuss the development and validation of the long version of a conceptual multiple-choice survey
instrument called the Survey of Thermodynamic Processes and First and Second Laws-Long (STPFaSL-Long) suitable
for introductory physics courses. This version of the survey instrument is a longer version of the original shorter version
developed and validated earlier. The 19 contexts including the exact wording of all of the problem situations posed in the
two versions of the survey instrument are identical and the difference between the long and short versions of the
instrument is only in the multiple-choice options. In particular, in the longer version of the survey instrument, there are
no alternative conceptions explicitly embedded in the four multiple-choice options students choose from and the
questions asked in a given context in one item of the shorter survey instrument were split into several items focusing,
e.g., on different thermodynamic variables. After the development and validation of the longer version of the survey
instrument, the final version was administered in 12 different in-person classes (four different institutions) in which
students answered the questions in-class on paper scantron forms with the instructor as the proctor and 12 different inperson classes (five different institutions) in which students answered the questions online on Qualtrics within a twohour period. This longer version of the survey instrument was administered to introductory physics students in various
traditionally taught calculus-based and algebra-based classes before and after traditional lecture-based instruction in
relevant concepts. It was also administered to upper-level undergraduates majoring in physics and Ph.D. students taught
traditionally for bench marking purposes and for concurrent validity, which involved comparing advanced students’
performance with those of introductory students for whom the survey is intended. Similar to the shorter version, we find
that although the longer version of the survey instrument focuses on thermodynamics concepts covered in introductory
courses, it is challenging even for advanced students. A comparison with the baseline data on the longer version of the
validated survey instrument presented here can help instructors evaluate the effectiveness of innovative pedagogies
designed to help students develop a solid grasp of these concepts.

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
A. Multiple Choice Surveys
Central goals of college introductory physics courses for life science, physical science and engineering majors
include helping all students develop functional understanding of physics and learn effective problem solving and
reasoning skills [1-10]. Validated conceptual multiple-choice physics survey instruments administered before and after
instruction in relevant concepts can be useful tools to gauge the effectiveness of curricula and pedagogies in promoting
robust conceptual understanding. When compared to free-response problems, multiple-choice problems can be graded
efficiently and results are easier to analyze statistically for different instructional methods and/or student populations.
However, multiple-choice problems also have some drawbacks. For example, students’ selection of the correct answers
does not necessarily reflect understanding of the underlying concepts. Also, students cannot be given partial credit for
their responses.
Multiple-choice survey instruments have been used as one tool to evaluate whether research-based
instructional strategies are successful in significantly improving students’ conceptual understanding of these concepts
[11-14]. Apart from the Force Concept Inventory, the most well-known survey, other conceptual survey instruments at
the introductory physics level in mechanics and electricity and magnetism have also been developed, including survey
instruments for kinematics represented graphically [15], energy and momentum [16], rotational and rolling motion [17,
18], electricity and magnetism [19-23], circuits [24] and Gauss’s law [25, 26]. In thermodynamics, existing conceptual
survey instruments include: 1) Heat and Temperature Conceptual Evaluation (HTCE) [27] that focuses on temperature,
phase change, heat transfer, thermal properties of materials; 2) Thermal Concept Evaluation (TCE) [28, 29] that also
focuses on similar concepts to HTCE; 3) Thermal Concept Survey (TCS) [30] that focuses on temperature, heat
transfer, ideal gas law, first law of thermodynamics, phase change, and thermal properties of materials; 4)
Thermodynamics Concept Inventory (TCI) [31] that focuses on concepts in engineering thermodynamics courses; and
5) Thermal and Transport Concept Inventory: Thermodynamics (TTCI:T) [32] that also focuses on concepts in
engineering thermodynamics courses. In addition, recently a multiple response survey has been developed for upperlevel thermal physics [33].
Despite the availability of the five conceptual survey instruments on introductory thermodynamics, there is a
lack of research-validated survey instrument that focuses on the basic concepts related to thermodynamic processes and
the first and second laws covered in introductory physics courses. Therefore, we earlier developed and validated [34,
35] a 33-item conceptual multiple-choice survey instrument on these concepts called the Survey of Thermodynamic
Processes and First and Second Laws (STPFaSL-Short). Here we discuss the development and validation [36, 37] of a
version of the survey instrument called STPFaSL-Long that is a longer version of the shorter survey developed and
validated earlier. The survey instrument can be accessed from PhysPort and is included in Ref. [36] in the
supplementary materials section. The 19 contexts—including the exact wording of all of the problem situations posed
in the short and long versions of the STPFaSL survey instrument—are identical, and the difference between the long
and short versions of the instrument is only in the multiple-choice options. In particular, in the longer version of the
survey, there are no alternative conceptions explicitly embedded in the four multiple-choice options students choose
from and the questions asked in a given context in one item of the shorter version of the survey were split into several
items focusing, e.g., on different thermodynamic variables. We note that the overlap of the STPFaSL content with the
HTCE and TCE is minimal. Moreover, although there is overlap between TCI, TTCI:T and STPFaSL concepts,
contexts used in the TCI and TTCI:T are engineering focused and, therefore, these surveys are unlikely to be used by
introductory physics instructors. Finally, the TCS is for introductory physics courses and covers some content common
with STPFaSL but the TCS is a much broader survey and has a major emphasis on temperature, the ideal gas law,
phase change and thermal properties of materials, content that are not explicitly the focus of the short and long versions
of the STPFaSL instrument.

B. Inspiration from prior investigations on student understanding of thermodynamics
Prior research has not only focused on the development and validation of multiple-choice surveys to
investigate students’ conceptual understanding of various thermodynamic concepts, but many investigations have
focused on student understanding of thermodynamics without using multiple-choice surveys [38-66]. Some of these
investigations use conceptual problems to probe student understanding and ask students to explain their reasoning.
These investigations were invaluable in the development of both versions, STPFaSL-Short instrument [34, 35] and the
STPFaSL-Long instrument discussed here. For brevity, below, we only give a few examples of studies that were used
as a guide and from which open-ended questions were used in the earlier stages of the development of the multiplechoice questions for both versions of the instrument discussed here.
Loverude et al. [39] investigated student understanding of the first law of thermodynamics in the context of
how students relate work to the adiabatic compression of an ideal gas. For example, in one problem used to investigate

student understanding in their study, students were asked to consider a cylindrical pump (diagram was provided)
containing one mole of an ideal gas. The piston fit tightly so that no gas could escape. Students were asked to consider
friction as being negligible between piston and the cylinder. The piston was thermally isolated from the surroundings.
In one version of the problem, students were asked what will happen to the temperature of the gas and why if the piston
is quickly pressed inward. Another type of problem posed to students in the same research involved providing a cyclic
process on a PV diagram in which parts of the cyclic process were isothermal, isobaric and isochoric. Students were
asked whether the work done in the entire cycle was positive, negative or zero and to explain their reasoning.
Another investigation of students’ reasoning about heat, work and the first law of thermodynamics in an
introductory calculus-based physics course by Meltzer [40] asked several conceptual problems some of which involved
PV diagrams. For example, one problem in this study involved two different processes represented on a PV diagram
that started at the same point and ended at the same point. Students were asked to compare the work done by the gas
and the heat absorbed by the gas in the two processes and explain their reasoning for their answers.
In another investigation focusing on student understanding of the ideal gas law using a macroscopic
perspective, Kautz et al. [41] asked several conceptual problems. For example, in one problem in which a diagram was
provided, three identical cylinders are filled with unknown quantities of ideal gases. The cylinders are closed with
identical frictionless pistons. Cylinders A and B are in thermal equilibrium with the room at 200C, and cylinder C is
kept at a temperature of 800C. The students were asked whether the pressure of the nitrogen gas in cylinder A is
greater than, less than, or equal to the pressure of the hydrogen gas in cylinder B, and whether the pressure of the
hydrogen gas in cylinder B is greater than, less than, or equal to the pressure of the hydrogen gas in cylinder C.
Students were asked to explain their reasoning.
Another investigation by Cochran et al. [42] focused on student conceptual understanding of heat engines and
the second law of thermodynamics. For example, in one question students were provided the diagram of a proposed
heat engine (including the temperatures of the hot and cold reservoirs, the heat absorbed from the hot reservoir and the
heat flow to the cold reservoir as well as the work done in one cycle) and asked if the device as shown could function
and why. In another investigation, Bucy et al. [43] focused on student understanding of entropy in the context of
comparison of ideal gas processes. For example, students were asked to compare the change in entropy of an ideal gas
in an isothermal expansion with a free expansion in a vacuum, and also to explain whether the change in entropy of the
gas in each case is positive, negative or zero in each case, and why. In another investigation by Christensen et al. [44],
students’ ideas regarding entropy and the second law of thermodynamics in an introductory physics course were
studied. They found that students struggled in distinguishing between entropy of the system and the surroundings and
had great difficulty with spontaneous processes. Another investigation by Smith et al. [45] focused on student
difficulties with concepts related to entropy, heat engines and the Carnot Cycle and how student understanding can be
improved.

C. Rationale for developing STPFaSL-Long
Before we discuss the development and validation of the STPFaSL-Long instrument, we discuss the rationale
for developing this long version when STPFaSL-Short version exists [34, 35]. In particular, all the scenarios for the 19
contexts and the wording of the questions before the options students select are identical in both of the versions of the
survey instrument related to thermodynamic processes and the first and second laws covered in introductory physics
courses. The difference between the long and short versions of the instrument is only in the multiple-choice options.
The rationale for developing the STPFaSL-Long version of the instrument came from discussions with some
thermodynamics instructors after the STPFaSL-Short version was developed and validated. Some instructors noted that
they prefer to give surveys in which no alternative conceptions of students are embedded in the questions since they did
not want students to be misled to an incorrect answer by gravitating to different alternative conceptions. They felt that
in the absence of the alternative conceptions, their students may perform significantly better because they would think
about each option more carefully instead of being misled by alternative conceptions embedded in some of the questions
in the short version of the instrument. Moreover, in the short version, students were often asked about more than one
thermodynamic variable in a single question. Since there are only five choices students can select from for each
question, they were only provided those choices in the multiple-choice questions that students had selected with highest
frequency in the written open-ended administration of these questions and individual interviews during the
development of the short version of the instrument. However, some instructors noted that they would prefer to use a
version in which all possible choices for each thermodynamic variable were provided in each situation, e.g., the internal
energy of a gas in a given situation increases, decreases, remains the same or there is not enough information.
Therefore, based upon the feedback from these instructors, we developed and validated the longer version of
the instrument, in which there are no alternative conceptions explicitly embedded in the four multiple-choice options
students are asked to choose from. Moreover, the questions asked in a given context in one item of the shorter version
of the instrument were split into several items focusing, e.g., on different thermodynamic variables.

To give a concrete example, item 1 in the short version of the instrument asks students to choose the correct
statement about the change in entropy of the gas that undergoes a reversible adiabatic expansion with incorrect options
involving alternative conceptions such as “Entropy of the gas increases because the gas expands” or “Entropy of the
gas remains constant because the entropy of the gas does not change for a reversible process”. On the other hand, the
corresponding item in long version of the instrument does not have alternative conceptions embedded in the options. It
asks students to choose the correct statement about the change in entropy of the gas that undergoes a reversible
adiabatic expansion with options such as entropy of the gas increases, decreases, remains constant and there is not
enough information.
To give another concrete example, item 2 in the short version asks which one of the following statements must
be true for the gas that undergoes a reversible adiabatic expansion process:
a.
The internal energy must decrease, and the work done by the gas must be positive.
b.
The internal energy must decrease, and the work done by the gas must be negative.
c.
The internal energy must increase, and the work done by the gas must be positive.
d.
The internal energy must increase, and the work done by the gas must be negative.
e.
None of the above.
Since not all possible choices can be provided for internal energy and work done by the gas in the short version (e.g.,
there is no option with one or both of them remaining constant), the long version of the instrument splits this item into
two separate items, one of which asks about internal energy and the other about the work done by the gas with each
question providing all possible options (e.g., the internal energy must decrease, increase, remain constant and there is
not enough information and the work done by the gas must be positive, negative, zero or there is not enough
information).
Based upon discussions with instructors, we believe that different instructors may prefer one version or
another based upon the features of the two versions they value. For example, some instructors may prefer the short
version which has alternative conceptions embedded in some of the items and in which an item can ask about two
thermodynamic variables with restricted options (as in the example with internal energy and work discussed above)
since those restricted options correspond to the most common choices students selected in the written open-ended
questions and individual interviews. However, as noted, other instructors may prefer the long version with no
alternative conceptions and an item being restricted to only one thermodynamic variable with all possible options
provided in the choices for that variable. We note that when we administered both the long and short versions of the
instrument to the first-year first semester Ph.D. students in physics at an interval of approximately two weeks, the
Pearson correlation coefficient between the two versions was 0.88, which is relatively high suggesting that both
versions are measuring very similar things. Thus, instructors can use the version they prefer. Moreover, both versions
take approximately the same amount of class time and can be administered in a 50-minute class period.

II. STPFaSL INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION
The development and validation process of the two versions of the survey instrument, STPFaSL-Long and
STPFaSL-Short [34, 35], were analogous to those for the earlier conceptual survey instruments developed by our group
[16, 18, 21, 22, 25]. Our process is consistent with the established guidelines for test development and validation using
the Classical Test Theory (CTT) [37]. According to the standards for multiple-choice survey instrument design, a highquality test instrument should have five characteristics: reliability, validity, discrimination, good comparative data and
suitability for the population [34, 35]. Moreover, the development and validation of a well-designed survey instrument
is an iterative process that should involve recognizing the need for the survey instrument, formulating the test
objectives and scope for measurement, constructing the test items, performing content validity and reliability checks,
and distribution [34, 35].
Below, we describe the development, validation and administration of the STPFaSL-Long version of the
instrument by first summarizing how the identical contexts for both the short and long versions were developed and
validated, how the items involving various contexts in the short version were split into several items without changing
the wording of the scenarios posed, and then presenting data from the administration of the final long version of the
survey instrument. As noted earlier, the contexts are identical for the two versions of STPFaSL instrument and the
difference between them is in the answer options students must choose from.

A. Development of test blueprint, formulation of test objectives and scope
More details about the STPFaSL-Short version of the survey instrument development can be found in Ref.
[34, 35] which is relevant for the development and validation of the long version discussed here. Summarizing the
development common for both versions, we note that before developing the instrument, we first developed a test

blueprint to provide a framework for deciding the desired test attributes [34, 35]. The test blueprint provided an outline
and guided the development of the test items. The development of the test blueprint entailed formulating the need for
the survey instrument, determining its scope, format and testing time of the test as well as determining the weights of
different sub-topics consistent with the scope and objective of the test. The specificity of the test plan helped to
determine the extent of content covered and the complexity of the questions. As noted in the introduction, despite the
existence of several thermodynamics survey instruments at the introductory level [27-32], there is no research-validated
survey instrument that focuses on the basics of thermodynamic processes and the first and second laws of
thermodynamics covered in the introductory physics courses. Therefore, we developed and validated an instrument
(with two versions: STPFaSL-Short and STPFaSL-Long) focusing on these content areas covered in introductory
physics courses. With regard to the weights of different sub-topics consistent with the scope and objective of the test,
we browsed over introductory physics textbooks, consulted with seven faculty members and looked at the kinds of
questions they asked their students in homework, quizzes and exams before determining the 19 contexts.
Both versions of the STPFaSL instrument have multiple-choice conceptual items on thermodynamic processes
and the first and second laws covered in both calculus-based and algebra-based introductory physics courses, however,
no calculus is required for students to complete the surveys. Both versions can be used to measure the effectiveness of
traditional and/or research-based approaches for helping introductory students learn thermodynamics concepts covered
in the survey for a group of students. Specifically, the survey instrument is designed to be a low stakes test to measure
the effectiveness of instruction in helping students in a particular course develop a good grasp of the concepts covered
and is not appropriate for high stakes testing. The survey instrument can be administered before and after instruction in
relevant concepts to evaluate introductory physics students’ understanding of these concepts and to evaluate whether
innovative curricula and pedagogies are effective in reducing the difficulties. With regard to the testing time, the survey
instrument (both short and long versions) is designed to be administered in one 50-minute class period although
instructors should feel free to give extra time to their students as they deem appropriate. As noted, the reason the longer
version of the STPFaSL does not take significantly more time is that all contexts and their wording are identical to the
shorter version and each item in the longer version is about one thermodynamic variable (e.g., entropy, internal energy,
heat transfer, work done by the system). Additionally, as noted, the answer choices in the long version do not explicitly
include student alternative conceptions, but rather focus on how each of these individual variables change; answer
choices are “increases,” “decreases,” “remains the same,” “not enough information” or the questions in the longer
version are framed as true/false questions. One exception is that in addition to the stem of the items, the four answer
choices in item 36 in the longer version and item 19 in the shorter version are identical.
We focused the survey content on thermodynamic processes and first and second laws that is basic enough
that the survey instrument is appropriate for both algebra-based and calculus-based introductory physics courses in
which these thermodynamics topics are covered. We also made sure that the survey instrument has questions at
different levels of cognitive achievement [34, 35]. To formulate test objectives and scope pertaining to thermodynamic
processes and first and second laws, the survey instrument development started by consulting with seven instructors
who regularly teach calculus-based and algebra-based introductory physics courses in which these topics in
thermodynamics are covered. We asked them about the goals and objectives they have when teaching these topics and
what they want their students to be able to do after instruction in relevant concepts. In addition to perusing the coverage
of these topics in several algebra-based and calculus-based introductory physics textbooks, we browsed over
homework, quiz, and exam problems that these instructors in introductory algebra-based and calculus-based courses at
a large research university had typically given to their students in the past before determining the test objective and
scope of the test in terms of the actual content, and starting the design of the questions for the instrument. The
preliminary distribution of questions from various topics was discussed and iterated several times, and finally agreed
upon with seven introductory physics course instructors at a large research university.
The selection of topics for the questions included consultation with 7 instructors who teach introductory
thermodynamics (some of whom had also taught upper-level thermodynamics) about their goals and objectives and the
types of conceptual and quantitative problems they expected their students in introductory physics courses to be able to
solve after instruction. The wording of the questions took advantage of the existing literature regarding student
difficulties in thermodynamics, input from students’ written responses and interviews and input from physics
instructors who teach these topics. In addition to leveraging the findings of prior research on students’ understanding of
these concepts [38-66], the process of administering some written open-ended questions and individual interviews with
students at a large research university was helpful to develop the survey items [34, 35]. Moreover, as part of the
development and validation of the survey, the concepts involved in the STPFaSL instrument, and the wording of the
questions have been independently evaluated by four physics faculty members who regularly teach thermodynamics at
the large research university (in addition to the feedback from members of the Physics Education Research or PER
group at the large research university) and iterated many times until agreed upon. Moreover, two faculty members from

other universities who are experts in thermodynamics PER provided invaluable feedback several times to improve the
quality of the survey questions.
As noted, the scope of both the short and long versions of the survey instrument is the same (identical 19
contexts and wording of the stem of the questions) except that the longer version splits each context in the shorter
version into several items and each asks about only one thermodynamic variable with choices such as “increases,”
“decreases,” “remains the same,” or “not enough information,” while some of the questions are framed as true/false
questions. Thus, the longer version separates questions about different thermodynamic variables for the same context
and scenario in order to make it easier for instructors to disentangle difficulties with different thermodynamic variables
in a given scenario. In addition to separating questions about different thermodynamic variables for the same context
and scenario, the four choices provided to students for each question in the longer version do not have any student
alternative conceptions unlike the shorter version, which would appeal to instructors who prefer not to have items with
alternative choices embedded in the choices provided.
As described in detail in Ref. [34, 35], we interviewed individual students using a think-aloud protocol at
various stages of the survey instrument development to obtain a better understanding of students’ reasoning processes
when they were answering the free-response and multiple-choice questions. Fine-tuning of the instrument based upon
statistical analysis using classical test theory (to be discussed in the next section for the longer version) was conducted
on different iterations of both the short and long versions of the survey instrument as the items were being refined.
Within this interview protocol, students were asked to talk aloud while they answered the questions so that the
interviewer could understand their thought processes. Individual interviews with students during development of the
survey instrument were useful for an in-depth understanding of the mechanisms underlying common student difficulties
and to ensure that students interpreted the questions appropriately. Based upon the student feedback, the questions were
refined and tweaked. During various stages of the development and validation process, 24 students in various algebrabased and calculus-based physics courses participated in the think-aloud interviews. Ten graduate students and
undergraduates who had learned these concepts in an upper-level thermodynamics and statistical mechanics course
were also interviewed while taking the shorter version (whose stems are identical to the longer version). In addition, 11
introductory physics students and 6 physics graduate students were interviewed while answering the STPFaSL-Long
version of the instrument using think-aloud protocol to understand how they reasoned about different choices on each
question on the longer version. The purpose of involving some advanced students in these interviews was to compare
the thought processes and difficulties of the advanced students in these courses with introductory students for bench
marking purposes. This type of bench marking has been valuable to illustrate growth of student understanding in prior
research [64]. We found that students’ reasoning difficulties across different levels are remarkably similar except in a
few instances, e.g., advanced students were more facile at reasoning with PV diagrams than introductory students.
The final version of the STPFaSL-Long survey instrument has 78 multiple-choice items including 22
true/false questions and each question has one correct choice and three incorrect choices. To aid instructors who
administer STPFaSL-Long in their classes, Figs. 1a-1c in Appendix A classify the broad categories of topics covered in
each of the 78 items of the STPFaSL-Long survey instrument as Processes, Systems, Quantities & Relations,
Representation, the First Law of Thermodynamics, and the Second Law of Thermodynamics. The Processes category
includes items which require understanding of thermodynamic constraints such as whether a process is reversible,
isothermal, isobaric or adiabatic. Also included are problems involving irreversible and cyclic processes. We note that
these different processes are not necessarily exclusive; e.g., one can consider an isothermal reversible process. The
Systems category includes items involving knowledge of the distinction between a system and the universe, items
involving subsystems or an isolated system. The Systems category also includes items in which a student could make
progress by making use of the fact that the system is an ideal gas (e.g., for an ideal gas, the internal energy and
temperature have a simple relationship which can be used to solve a problem). Quantities and Relations includes survey
items specific to a quantity such as internal energy, work, heat, entropy, and their quantitative relationships. For
example, the relationship between work and the area under the curve on a PV diagram is tested in several problems.
The Representation category includes items in which a process is represented on a PV diagram. Finally, the last two
categories include items requiring the First Law and Second Law of Thermodynamics. We classified questions about
heat engines into the Second Law of Thermodynamics category (although heat engines involve both the first and
second laws) due to the particular focus of these.

B.

Validation of the survey instrument

While developing and validating the STPFaSL survey instrument (both short and long versions), we paid
particular attention to the issues of reliability and validity [37, 67-70]. Test reliability refers to the internal consistency
of the test or relative degree of consistency between the scores if an individual immediately repeats the test, and
validity refers to the appropriateness of interpreting the test scores [37, 67-70]. We note that the STPFaSL instrument is

appropriate for making interpretations about the effectiveness of instruction in relevant concepts in a particular course
and it is not supposed to be used for high stakes testing of individual students.
Face validity of the test refers to whether it is a good measure of students’ understanding of the concepts
measured by the test and content validity of a test refers to whether the experts in the discipline who review the test
agree that the items in the test adequately cover all aspects of the construct being measured [37]. In the earlier
subsections of section II, we already discussed face validity and content validity including how expert and student
involvement (via open-ended questions and individual interviews) was used for this purpose. Also, although the survey
instrument focuses on concepts that are typically covered in introductory thermodynamics and is appropriate for
introductory physics courses, it was also administered to undergraduates in upper-level thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics courses in which these concepts are generally covered and to first-year first-semester physics Ph.D. students
to obtain base line data and to check for one form of criterion validity or concurrent validity [71, 72]. In particular, we
discuss the concurrent validity of the STPFaSL-Long survey instrument using comparison between introductory and
advanced students’ performance (e.g., whether introductory students outperformed advanced students on the survey).
Since the quantitative measures validating the STPFaSL-Short instrument were described earlier [34, 35], below we
focus only on the STPFaSL-Long instrument in terms of the quantitative measures used in the classical test theory for a
reliable survey instrument including item analysis (using item difficulty and point biserial coefficient) and KR-20 [37,
73, 74].

C. Proctored and unproctored administration of STPFaSL-Long
After the development and validation of STPFaSL-Long, data were collected using the final version
administered in various classes. This includes 12 different in-person classes (four different institutions) in which
students answered the questions in-class on paper scantron forms (proctored administration) and 12 other different inperson classes (five different institutions) in which students answered the questions online on Qualtrics within a twohour period from the time they started the survey (unproctored administration). Even though all classes were taught inperson, the reason for administering STPFaSL-Long unproctored via Qualtrics in half of the classes is that many course
instructors were reluctant to spend an entire class period to administer it. Considering physics instructors often feel that
they must cover a lot of content and cannot spare a class period to administer a survey, this issue of online
administration even in in-person classes is commonly encountered in physics classes [75]. Since the data from different
institutions for the same type of course (e.g., calculus-based introductory physics course) are similar, average combined
data from different institutions for the same course type are presented here. All data presented here are from primarily
traditional lecture-based physics courses (in-class administration data are in Appendix B, Qualtrics data for students
who took the survey online are in Appendix C and the STPFaSL-Long survey instrument is in the supplementary
materials) so that instructors in courses covering the same concepts but using innovative pedagogies can compare their
students’ performance with those provided here to gauge the relative effectiveness of their instructional design and
pedagogies. We combined the upper-level undergraduates and first-year first-semester physics Ph.D. students since the
first-year graduate students only had thermodynamics instruction in their upper-level undergraduate courses.
In the in-person administration of the full 78-item survey instrument, students were provided the entire class
period (typically 50 minutes) but in the online administration of the survey instrument using Qualtrics, students were
provided two-hours from the time they started the survey in one sitting in a given week after instruction in relevant
concepts. In consultation with several instructors, the reason students were provided two-hours for the online
unproctored administration via Qualtrics is that since these students are not taking the survey in class, they may get
interrupted by various things including visitors and phones but we did not want to give students unlimited time to limit
the opportunity to look up answers or consult with others (note that the unproctored Qualtrics version explicitly noted
that students were not supposed to consult any resources including books, notes, internet, friends). Moreover,
STPFaSL-Long was administered before instruction (as a pretest) in relevant concepts to investigate student
understanding before instruction in some of the introductory physics courses at one university only because other
instructors did not think it was necessary and were reluctant to administer the survey both before and after instruction
in their classes. For all pre-test data and some of the in-person administered introductory posttest data, students were
given only the first 48 items or the last 52 items of the 78-item survey. In all undergraduate courses, students were
given extra credit incentives to take the survey consistent with suggestions of Effective Practices for Physics Programs
Guide section on How to Select and Use Various Assessment Methods in your Program [76]. In particular, if students
are not given any grade incentives, some students do not take the survey seriously, but the survey should be a low
stakes assessment consistent with our goals.

D. Overall performance, reliability, item difficulty and point biserial coefficient
After the development and validation of STPFaSL-Long instrument, as noted, the final version was
administered as proctored assessment in 12 different classes (four different institutions) in which students answered the
questions in-class on paper scantron forms and as unproctored assessment in 12 different classes (five different
institutions) in which students answered the questions online on Qualtrics within a two -hour time-window. All 24
classes were taught in-person. The survey instrument was administered to introductory physics students in various
traditionally taught calculus-based and algebra-based classes after traditional lecture-based instruction in relevant
concepts. It was also administered to upper-level undergraduates majoring in physics, taught traditionally, and Ph.D.
students for benchmarking purposes and for one type of criterion validity (concurrent validity), which involved
comparing their performance with those of introductory students for whom the survey is intended. We find that
although the survey instrument focuses on thermodynamics concepts covered in introductory courses, it is challenging
even for advanced students. Moreover, in some introductory courses at one university, as noted, the pretest was
administered before students learned about thermodynamics in that course and the posttest was administered after
instruction in relevant concepts. We note that some introductory physics instructors teach thermodynamics at the end of
the first semester introductory physics course while others teach it at the beginning or in the middle of another second
semester course. We did not find any trends based upon these, so all data are included for a particular group of students.
While students who took the survey online via Qualtrics were told that it was a survey in which they were not
supposed to consult any resources, we did not have any method for verifying that. On the other hand, the in-class
administration was proctored by the instructor of the course. Due to proctored and unproctored nature of the
administration, we feel that these data are best kept separate so that instructors using similar mode of administration for
a particular group of students can compare their course’s performance with the averages provided here.
Table I shows in-class administration data pertaining to average student performance on the STPFaSL-Long
instrument from introductory calculus-based and algebra-based courses for matched and unmatched students on pretest
(before instruction) and posttest (after instruction) from a university where the pretest was also administered. For
calculus-based courses, some of the instructors only administered the pretest or posttest, but not both. The matched and
unmatched data in Table 1 are only for those instructors who administered both pretest and posttest. This table shows
that the matched and unmatched data are very similar. Therefore, in the rest of the paper, we include all data available
for a particular group. Moreover, we conducted a t-test and found that the scores of the calculus-based and algebrabased classes (both for the pretest and posttest) are not statistically significantly different. However, we have kept these
scores separate since many instructors/researchers are often only interested in data from calculus-based physics classes
or algebra-based physics classes.
TABLE I: Data showing average student performance on the STPFaSL-Long instrument from introductory calculus-based and
algebra-based courses for matched and unmatched students on pretest (before instruction) and posttest (after instruction) from a
university where the pretest was also administered.

Pretest

Intro
calculus
Intro
algebra

Post-Test

Matched

Unmatched

Matched

Unmatched

52.1%
N = 214
51.0%

51.6%
N = 266
50.9%

56.6%
N = 214
57.1%

56.7%
N = 241
57.0%

N = 315

N = 371

N = 315

N = 388

One way to measure reliability of the test instrument is to prepare an ensemble of identical students, administer
the test instrument to them, and analyze the resulting distribution on each item and overall scores. Since this is generally
impractical, instead, a method is devised to use subsets of the test itself and consider the correlation between different
subsets. The Kuder-Richardson reliability index or KR-20 reliability index [37, 73, 74], which is a measure of the selfconsistency of the entire test instrument, can take a value between 0 and 1 (it divides the full instrument into subsets and
the consistency between the scores on different subsets is estimated). If guessing is high, KR-20 will be low. Table II
shows the number of students in each group averaged across similar classes to whom the final version of the survey was
administered, as well as the average performance of different groups on the entire survey instrument for in-class and
online administrations using Qualtrics; KR-20 for the post-tests for each group that took the entire survey are also shown.
The KR-20 values for all groups in Table II are reasonable for predictions about a group of students [38, 74, 75]. We
note that the written student data are from 12 different in-person courses from four different large public institutions;
students completed the survey in class on Scantrons during a 50-minute class period if they took the entire survey since

some students were administered only the first 48 or last 52 questions. In particular, not all introductory students answered
all survey questions, and some introductory students were given only the first 48 or last 52 questions during recitation
sessions to ensure split-test reliability. On the post-test (pre-test), out of the 492 (753) Int-calc students, 168 (505) were
given the first 48 questions, 73 (248) were given the last 52 questions, and 251 (0) were given the full survey. On the
post-test (pre-test), out of the 550 (371) Int-alg students, 170 (173) were given the first 48 questions, 218 (198) were
given the last 52 questions, and 162 (0) were given the full survey.
The item difficulty of each multiple-choice question on the STPFaSL-Long instrument is simply the
percentage of students who correctly answered the question, i.e., it is the average score on a particular item. Results in
Table III in Appendix B show not only the item difficulty of each item on the instrument but also the prevalence of
different incorrect choices for each item for each group for in-class administration. The corresponding data for online
administration using Qualtrics are shown in Table IV in Appendix C.
TABLE II. The average performance and standard deviation (SD) of different groups on the STPFaSL-Long, the number (N) of
students who participated in the survey in each group as well as KR-20 for posttests when students took the entire survey. “Upper
Post” consists of advanced undergraduate students who had learned the relevant concepts in an upper-level thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics course and first-year physics Ph.D. students in their first semester of the Ph.D. program who had not taken the
graduate level thermodynamics and statistical mechanics course at their institution. Pretest (Pre) was administered before students
learned relevant concepts in the course and posttest (Post) was administered after relevant instruction in the calculus-based and
algebra-based introductory physics courses. For in-person administration of the survey for introductory students only, some students
were given the entire 78-item survey and this is shown by (78). Some students were given only the first 48 items or the last 52 items
of the 78-item survey, and these groups are represented with (48) and (52), respectively.
In-person
Pre-test (48)
…
…
…

In-person
Pre-test (52)
…
…
…

In-person
Posttest (78)
76%
N = 89
SD = 14%
KR-20 = 0.90

In-person
Posttest (48)
…
…
…

In-person
Posttest (52)
…
…
…

Online
Posttest (78)
68%
N = 179
SD = 17%
KR-20 = 0.92

Int-calc

52%
N = 505
SD = 9%

52%
N = 248
SD = 10%

58%
N = 251
SD = 11%
KR-20 = 0.80

58%
N = 168
SD = 11%

55%
N = 73
SD = 12%

70%
N = 376
SD = 19%
KR-20 = 0.94

Int-alg

51%
N = 173
SD = 9%

51%
N = 198
SD = 10%

52%
N = 162
SD = 11%
KR-20 = 0.77

55%
N = 170
SD = 11%

58%
N = 218
SD = 13%

60%
N = 450
SD = 20%
KR-20 = 0.94

Level
Upper

Average KR20 for All
Posttests (78)

0.87

0.94

The Point Biserial Coefficient or PBC is designed to measure how well a given item predicts the overall score
on a test. It is defined as the correlation coefficient between the score for a given item and the overall score. The PBC
can take on values between -1 and 1; a negative value indicates that otherwise high-performing students score poorly
on this item, and otherwise low-performing students do well on the item. The point biserial coefficients are shown in
Figure 2 for in-person administration and Figure 3 for online administration in Appendix D. A commonly used criterion
[37, 73, 74] states that it is desirable for this measure to be greater than or equal to 0.2, which is exceeded for 71 of the
78 items on the STPFaSL for the in-person implementation (and is lower than 0.2 only for one question for the online
implementation at 0.16). Five of these questions with a PBC less than 0.2 focus on entropy in which the advanced
students did not necessarily do better than the introductory group.

E. Note on items with point biserial coefficient below the threshold
Five of the seven questions below the threshold for the in-class administration (items 5, 8, 24, 48 and 64) are
related to entropy on which advanced students’ average performance is comparable to introductory physics students’

average performance. Our analysis shows that many advanced students performed poorly on these questions because
they incorrectly thought that the entropy of a system always increases (e.g., in one cycle of a cyclic process). These
findings are consistent with Meltzer’s findings [52]. The other two items with PBC below the threshold are item 36
(basics of Carnot engine) and item 70 (magnitude of work done in an adiabatic process is the same as magnitude of
heat transfer in a constant volume process if the change in internal energy is same in both processes). On item 36, the
average scores of all groups are at or below 40%, and for item 70, it is at or below 30% which implies that these items
are extremely difficult for students at all levels. The poor performance of all groups reduced the PBC. We believe that
the issues covered in these two items are important issues that instructors should focus on to help students at all levels
learn them better so we keep these items.

F. Reliability via splitting the survey and administering each half to different students in
introductory classes
We also tested reliability by splitting the survey instrument in two parts [37] without splitting related
questions involving a given scenario, with 48 questions in one part and 52 questions in another part; 22 items
were common between the two parts (these 22 items common items were the last 22 questions in the part with 48
questions and the first 22 questions in the part with 52 questions). At one university, we randomly administered to
some students in introductory physics classes one part (48 questions) or the other part (52 questions) in-class. The
performances of calculus-based introductory physics students who were administered the two version on the
common 22 questions were 58.5% vs. 58.8%, which is similar, providing further evidence of reliability of the
survey particularly because the order in which students were administered these questions was different, i.e., for
some students these were the last 22 questions while for the others they were the first 22 questions. Also, the
performances of these students on all 48 or 52 questions were 57.6% and 55.0%, respectively, showing that the
first and second halves of the survey are relatively comparable in difficulty.

G. Concurrent validity via administration to student groups at different levels
Earlier we discussed other forms of validity, e.g., face validity, content validity etc. Here we discuss one type
of criterion validity or concurrent validity from administering the survey instrument to upper-level students and Ph.D.
students (advanced students) [71, 72]. The criterion validity shows how well a test correlates with an established
standard of comparison called a criterion [37]. One measure of this type of validity or concurrent validity can come
from the expectation that introductory students will be outperformed by advanced students. As noted, a large number of
students from introductory courses in which these concepts were covered were administered the final version of the
survey instrument and advanced students in thermodynamic and statistical mechanics courses were administered the
survey for the purposes of bench marking and concurrent validity of the instrument (see Table II).
The average data for calculus-based and algebra-based introductory students as well as advanced students
tabulated in Table II show the expected trends for proctored in-class administration of the survey. In particular,
advanced students with 76% average outperformed introductory physics students on the posttest (calculus-based
courses averaged 57% and algebra-based courses averaged 55%). The average pretest performances of introductory
physics groups were 52% and 51% (lower than posttest). These expected trends serve as a measure of concurrent
validity although the STPFaSL survey is so difficult that none of the groups have stellar performance.
The data for the unproctored online administration (see Table II) show that advanced students obtained an
average of 68% vs. 70% and 60%, respectively, for the calculus-based and algebra-based introductory physics courses
after instruction in relevant concepts. Thus, introductory physics groups performed better in the online administration
but the calculus-based introductory students performed exceptionally well comparable to the advanced students. The
difference between the average scores for the proctored in-person and un-proctored Qualtrics administration for
advanced students was -8%, for the algebra-based introductory physics students was 5% and for the calculus-based
introductory physics students was 13%. In particular, in the online administration via Qualtrics, even though advanced
students performed better than algebra-based physics post, calculus-based post averages are comparable to advanced
student averages. We note that in the unproctored administration, the concurrent validity holds only for comparison
between algebra-based introductory physics students and advanced students. It is not possible to pin-point the reasons
for why calculus-based introductory students performed so well (comparable to advanced students), in the unproctored
online administration of the survey. Introductory students may be more relaxed when taking the unproctored survey out
of class which may be one reason that these groups on average performed better. However, we hypothesize that the
better online performance may at least partly be due to a higher percentage of calculus-based introductory students
consulting resources (they were asked not to consult with) in the un-proctored Qualtrics survey compared to the
advanced students. In particular, while all students were told that the online survey was a closed book and closed notes
test and students were not supposed to consult other resources, if some students in a particular group consulted external

resources when answering the survey questions, that can affect the overall performance of the group [77, 78]. These
data are still useful for what we can expect from an online administration of the survey to each group of students in
which student response counted for extra credit [76]. In particular, it is still very useful to have the unproctored
Qualtrics data since many instructors are only willing to administer these surveys online and they should be aware of
these constraints when analyzing their own class data.

H. Validity via measuring correlation between long and short versions
Some first-year first semester graduate students were administered both versions of the STPFaSL survey. The
Pearson correlation between the short and long versions of the STPFaSL survey instrument for these students who were
administered both versions of the survey at an interval of approximately two weeks is 0.88, which is a relatively high
correlation showing that both the short and long versions measure very similar things and instructors can use whichever
version they prefer. This high correlation with the already validated shorter version of the survey further demonstrates
the validity of the longer version compared to the already validated shorter version [34, 35].

I. A glance at student difficulties on the validated survey
Details about student difficulties found using the STPFaSL-Long instrument and comparison with STPFaSLShort or prior studies are beyond the scope of this paper and will be presented elsewhere. However, we note that since
the STPFaSL-Long instrument has been administered to a large number of students at different institutions for inperson and online formats, quantitative conclusions can be drawn about the prevalence of the many conceptual
difficulties students have with these fundamental concepts in thermodynamics (see Table III for average performance
of each group on each item for in-class administration in Appendix B and Table IV in Appendix C for online
administration). Some of the conceptual difficulties displayed on the survey instrument include difficulty reasoning
with multiple quantities simultaneously, difficulty in systematically applying various constraints (for an isothermal,
adiabatic, isochoric, reversible, or irreversible process, isolated system, etc.), difficulty due to oversimplification of the
first law and overgeneralization of the second law. As noted, many of these difficulties were inspired and incorporated
in the survey instrument based upon those that have been documented (e.g., see Ref. [38-66]). Moreover, our findings
with this validated survey instrument demonstrate the robustness of the previous findings, e.g., in Ref. [38-66], about
student difficulties with these concepts in old contexts that have previously been studied and new contexts.

III. SUMMARY
We developed, validated and administered the longer version of the STPFaSL instrument, which is a
conceptual multiple-choice test focusing on thermodynamic processes and the first and second laws at the level covered
in introductory physics courses. This survey instrument is a longer version of the shorter version developed and
validated earlier in 2015. The 19 contexts including the exact wording of all of the problem situations posed in the two
survey instruments are identical. The difference between the long and short versions of the instrument is only in the
multiple-choice options. In particular, in the STPFaSL-Long survey, there are no alternative conceptions explicitly
embedded in the four multiple-choice options students choose from and the questions asked in a given context in one
item of the shorter survey were split into several items focusing, e.g., on different thermodynamic variables. The
concepts related to thermodynamic processes and the first and second laws focusing on topics covered in an
introductory physics course were challenging even for advanced students who were administered the survey instrument
for obtaining baseline data and for evaluating content validity. The STPFaSL instrument is designed to measure the
effectiveness of traditional and/or research-based approaches for helping introductory students learn thermodynamics
concepts. The average individual scores on the survey instrument from traditionally taught classes at various
institutions included in this study are low. We note that the average scores for other conceptual survey instruments for
traditionally taught introductory classes are also low, e.g., for the Brief Electricity and Magnetism Assessment [19], the
posttest scores for introductory students range from 23% to 45%, and for the Conceptual Survey of Electricity and
Magnetism [20], the scores range from 25% to 47%. The low scores even after instruction indicate that the traditional
instructional approach using lectures alone is ineffective in helping students learn these concepts. The instructors can
choose the longer or shorter version of the STPFaSL survey instrument depending upon their preference to measure the
effectiveness of instruction in these topics using a research-based pedagogy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank David Meltzer and Mike Loverude for providing extensive feedback on several versions of the survey
instrument. We also thank Jessica Clark for feedback on one version of the survey. We also thank David Meltzer and

Robert P. Devaty for helpful feedback on the manuscript. We thank all faculty members and students from all
institutions who helped during the development and validation of the survey instrument and/or administered the final
version to their classes.

APPENDIX A: Relevant Topics for Each Question
Appendix A gives an example of relevant topics for each question.

Processes

Systems

Quantities and
Relations

Representation
First Law
Second Law

Item #
Reversible
Irreversible
Cyclic
Isothermal
Isobaric
Isochoric
Adiabatic
Systems &
Universe
Isolated System
Ideal Gas
Path Independence
of State Variables
Internal Energy
Relation to T
Heat
Work
Relation to p, V
Entropy
Relation to Q, T
PV Diagram
1st Law
2nd Law
Engine Efficiency

1

2

3

R

R

R

4

R

5

6

7

8

9

R

R

R

R

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

R

R

R

R

18

19

20

21

R

R

22

R

R
R

R

R

R
R
R

R
R

R
R
R
R
R

R
R

R
R
R
R
R
R
R

R

R

R

R

R

26

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R

R

R

R
R
R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R
R
R
R

R
R
R
R

R
R

R

25

R
R

R

24

R
R

R

23

R
R

R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R
R
R
R

R
R

R

R
R

R
R

R

FIGURE 1a. Topics for items 1-26 (topics for items 27-78 are in Figs. 1b and 1c). Along with other physics faculty members who teach thermodynamics, we
identified topics involved in each item used for one possible method of solving the problem (note that several other approaches can be used to solve different
problems). An “R” indicates that a concept is required to solve the problem using the cited solution method or the information is provided in the question.

Processes

Systems

Quantities and
Relations

Representation
First Law
Second Law

Item #
Reversible
Irreversible
Cyclic
Isothermal
Isobaric
Isochoric
Adiabatic
Systems &
Universe
Isolated System
Ideal Gas
Path Indep of
State Variables
Internal Energy
Relation to T
Heat
Work
Relation to p,
V
Entropy
Relation to
Q, T
PV Diagram
1st Law
2nd Law
Engine
Efficiency

FIGURE 1b. Topics for items 27-53.

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

R

35

36

R

R

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

R
R

R

R
R

R

R
R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R
R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R
R
R
R

R
R
R
R
R

R
R

R

R
R

R
R
R
R
R

R
R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R
R

R

R

R
R

R
R

R

R
R
R

R

R

R

R

R

R

53

R
R

R
R

52

R
R

R

51

R

Processes

Systems

Quantities and
Relations

Representation
First Law
Second Law

Item #
Reversible
Irreversible
Cyclic
Isothermal
Isobaric
Isochoric
Adiabatic
Systems &
Universe
Isolated System
Ideal Gas
Path Indep of St
Var
Internal Energy
Relation to T
Heat
Work
Relation to p,
V
Entropy
Relation to Q,
T
PV Diagram
1st Law
2nd Law
Engine Efficiency

FIGURE 1c. Topics for items 54-78.

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R
R

R

R
R

R

R
R

R

R

R
R
R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R

R
R
R
R
R

R
R

R
R
R

R
R

R

R
R

R
R
R

R
R
R
R

R

R
R

R

R

R
R

R
R
R
R

R

R

R
R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R

R

R
R

R
R

R

R

R
R

R

R

R

APPENDIX B: STUDENT PERFORMANCE ON EACH QUESTION FOR IN-PERSON
ADMINISTRATION
Appendix B shows the distribution of answer choices for each group on each question when the survey was
given in class.
TABLE III: Average percentage scores for each of the four choices for each item for in-person administration of the STPFaSL-Long
instrument for each group before (pre) and after (post) instruction in relevant concepts. Abbreviations for various student groups:
Upper (students in junior/senior level thermodynamics and physics Ph.D. students in their first semester of a Ph.D. program who had
also only taken the junior/senior level thermodynamics course), calc (students in introductory calculus-based physics courses), algebra
(students in introductory algebra-based physics courses). The four columns after the item number show the percentage of students who
selected choices A-D for each item. Questions that are true/false are coded with A being true and B being false; options C and D are
not used. The number of students in each group is the same as in Table II. The correct answers are bold, underlined, and italicized.

Item #

1

2

3

4

5

6

A

B

C

D

Level

26%

2%

69%

3%

Upper Post

37%

11%

47%

6%

Calc Post

56%

17%

24%

3%

Calc Pre

55%

9%

31%

5%

Algebra Post

57%

14%

25%

4%

Algebra Pre

54%

21%

20%

6%

Upper Post

30%

28%

39%

4%

Calc Post

20%

32%

46%

3%

Calc Pre

24%

26%

47%

2%

Algebra Post

28%

28%

43%

1%

Algebra Pre

75%

10%

11%

3%

Upper Post

54%

24%

19%

4%

Calc Post

48%

19%

27%

6%

Calc Pre

41%

27%

27%

5%

Algebra Post

41%

25%

28%

6%

Algebra Pre

13%

68%

17%

2%

Upper Post

18%

30%

50%

3%

Calc Post

27%

42%

30%

1%

Calc Pre

18%

21%

59%

2%

Algebra Post

19%

28%

51%

2%

Algebra Pre

26%

42%

31%

1%

Upper Post

29%

36%

33%

3%

Calc Post

28%

50%

20%

3%

Calc Pre

27%

48%

22%

3%

Algebra Post

23%

54%

22%

2%

Algebra Pre

89%

8%

2%

1%

Upper Post

80%

9%

9%

2%

Calc Post

79%

5%

10%

6%

Calc Pre

80%

11%

6%

3%

Algebra Post

80%

10%

5%

5%

Algebra Pre

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

31%

51%

16%

2%

Upper Post

31%

46%

21%

2%

Calc Post

26%

13%

59%

3%

Calc Pre

28%

18%

51%

3%

Algebra Post

22%

5%

71%

2%

Algebra Pre

36%

8%

49%

7%

Upper Post

25%

16%

54%

5%

Calc Post

16%

12%

67%

5%

Calc Pre

19%

11%

65%

6%

Algebra Post

14%

8%

75%

4%

Algebra Pre

16%

29%

44%

10%

Upper Post

33%

26%

35%

6%

Calc Post

44%

22%

21%

13%

Calc Pre

56%

12%

20%

12%

Algebra Post

58%

16%

16%

10%

Algebra Pre

9%

88%

3%

0%

Upper Post

18%

72%

9%

1%

Calc Post

30%

55%

13%

2%

Calc Pre

30%

58%

10%

2%

Algebra Post

34%

54%

11%

2%

Algebra Pre

21%

66%

2%

10%

Upper Post

23%

64%

9%

3%

Calc Post

25%

56%

15%

4%

Calc Pre

27%

55%

15%

3%

Algebra Post

27%

58%

11%

3%

Algebra Pre

28%

17%

47%

8%

Upper Post

56%

11%

29%

4%

Calc Post

67%

6%

23%

4%

Calc Pre

66%

6%

23%

5%

Algebra Post

72%

6%

17%

5%

Algebra Pre

3%

2%

94%

0%

Upper Post

6%

9%

82%

3%

Calc Post

7%

6%

84%

2%

Calc Pre

8%

8%

83%

2%

Algebra Post

12%

6%

79%

2%

Algebra Pre

1%

93%

3%

2%

Upper Post

5%

91%

3%

1%

Calc Post

8%

84%

6%

2%

Calc Pre

5%

90%

5%

1%

Algebra Post

5%

88%

6%

1%

Algebra Pre

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

97%

3%

0%

0%

Upper Post

85%

9%

6%

1%

Calc Post

77%

11%

9%

3%

Calc Pre

86%

8%

5%

1%

Algebra Post

80%

9%

10%

1%

Algebra Pre

17%

74%

6%

3%

Upper Post

17%

71%

9%

3%

Calc Post

16%

69%

13%

3%

Calc Pre

11%

80%

8%

1%

Algebra Post

13%

74%

12%

1%

Algebra Pre

78%

5%

15%

2%

Upper Post

23%

5%

69%

4%

Calc Post

16%

6%

75%

3%

Calc Pre

20%

7%

71%

1%

Algebra Post

12%

6%

79%

3%

Algebra Pre

4%

96%

-

-

Upper Post

17%

83%

-

-

Calc Post

18%

82%

-

-

Calc Pre

21%

79%

-

-

Algebra Post

28%

72%

-

-

Algebra Pre

19%

81%

-

-

Upper Post

53%

47%

-

-

Calc Post

69%

31%

-

-

Calc Pre

51%

49%

-

-

Algebra Post

68%

32%

-

-

Algebra Pre

82%

18%

-

-

Upper Post

77%

23%

-

-

Calc Post

73%

27%

-

-

Calc Pre

80%

20%

-

-

Algebra Post

68%

32%

-

-

Algebra Pre

8%

87%

6%

0%

Upper Post

29%

47%

21%

2%

Calc Post

30%

43%

24%

3%

Calc Pre

27%

50%

22%

0%

Algebra Post

33%

53%

12%

3%

Algebra Pre

63%

34%

3%

0%

Upper Post

37%

45%

17%

1%

Calc Post

39%

37%

20%

4%

Calc Pre

39%

37%

20%

3%

Algebra Post

36%

39%

23%

2%

Algebra Pre

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

76%

6%

15%

3%

Upper Post

57%

14%

28%

1%

Calc Post

60%

10%

29%

2%

Calc Pre

58%

11%

27%

4%

Algebra Post

55%

13%

31%

1%

Algebra Pre

57%

38%

0%

4%

Upper Post

63%

27%

8%

2%

Calc Post

63%

19%

13%

6%

Calc Pre

67%

22%

9%

2%

Algebra Post

77%

16%

5%

2%

Algebra Pre

6%

9%

83%

2%

Upper Post

17%

11%

72%

1%

Calc Post

15%

19%

63%

4%

Calc Pre

14%

15%

69%

2%

Algebra Post

13%

13%

72%

2%

Algebra Pre

25%

52%

13%

10%

Upper Post

37%

31%

28%

4%

Calc Post

49%

16%

24%

11%

Calc Pre

55%

16%

24%

5%

Algebra Post

61%

18%

17%

3%

Algebra Pre

27%

73%

-

-

Upper Post

71%

29%

-

-

Calc Post

67%

33%

-

-

Calc Pre

65%

35%

-

-

Algebra Post

70%

30%

-

-

Algebra Pre

83%

17%

-

-

Upper Post

65%

35%

-

-

Calc Post

56%

44%

-

-

Calc Pre

67%

33%

-

-

Algebra Post

46%

54%

-

-

Algebra Pre

89%

11%

-

-

Upper Post

74%

26%

-

-

Calc Post

73%

27%

-

-

Calc Pre

77%

23%

-

-

Algebra Post

67%

33%

-

-

Algebra Pre

15%

85%

-

-

Upper Post

33%

67%

-

-

Calc Post

45%

55%

-

-

Calc Pre

45%

55%

-

-

Algebra Post

50%

50%

-

-

Algebra Pre

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

87%

13%

-

-

Upper Post

69%

31%

-

-

Calc Post

51%

49%

-

-

Calc Pre

69%

31%

-

-

Algebra Post

53%

47%

-

-

Algebra Pre

16%

84%

-

-

Upper Post

46%

54%

-

-

Calc Post

55%

45%

-

-

Calc Pre

50%

50%

-

-

Algebra Post

60%

40%

-

-

Algebra Pre

8%

83%

7%

2%

Upper Post

16%

76%

8%

0%

Calc Post

9%

84%

6%

1%

Calc Pre

11%

81%

6%

1%

Algebra Post

8%

85%

6%

1%

Algebra Pre

7%

15%

70%

9%

Upper Post

12%

25%

58%

4%

Calc Post

24%

15%

59%

2%

Calc Pre

20%

20%

55%

5%

Algebra Post

24%

17%

58%

1%

Algebra Pre

16%

84%

-

-

Upper Post

30%

70%

-

-

Calc Post

19%

81%

-

-

Calc Pre

26%

74%

-

-

Algebra Post

22%

78%

-

-

Algebra Pre

26%

21%

32%

21%

Upper Post

19%

11%

30%

40%

Calc Post

19%

13%

35%

34%

Calc Pre

21%

15%

29%

35%

Algebra Post

17%

13%

34%

37%

Algebra Pre

82%

18%

-

-

Upper Post

55%

45%

-

-

Calc Post

55%

45%

-

-

Calc Pre

45%

55%

-

-

Algebra Post

48%

52%

-

-

Algebra Pre

22%

78%

-

-

Upper Post

28%

72%

-

-

Calc Post

53%

47%

-

-

Calc Pre

33%

67%

-

-

Algebra Post

45%

55%

-

-

Algebra Pre

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

13%

88%

-

-

Upper Post

39%

61%

-

-

Calc Post

48%

52%

-

-

Calc Pre

52%

48%

-

-

Algebra Post

56%

44%

-

-

Algebra Pre

9%

83%

3%

5%

Upper Post

18%

61%

18%

4%

Calc Post

11%

55%

27%

6%

Calc Pre

13%

58%

24%

6%

Algebra Post

14%

60%

20%

6%

Algebra Pre

9%

67%

17%

7%

Upper Post

17%

45%

32%

6%

Calc Post

25%

37%

31%

7%

Calc Pre

20%

42%

31%

7%

Algebra Post

24%

43%

26%

7%

Algebra Pre

9%

7%

84%

0%

Upper Post

15%

10%

74%

1%

Calc Post

50%

18%

28%

3%

Calc Pre

38%

14%

46%

2%

Algebra Post

64%

15%

17%

4%

Algebra Pre

83%

12%

4%

0%

Upper Post

74%

16%

9%

1%

Calc Post

45%

26%

26%

3%

Calc Pre

60%

21%

17%

2%

Algebra Post

43%

27%

28%

2%

Algebra Pre

7%

88%

4%

1%

Upper Post

18%

69%

8%

4%

Calc Post

15%

69%

12%

4%

Calc Pre

17%

70%

11%

2%

Algebra Post

14%

74%

8%

3%

Algebra Pre

7%

65%

20%

8%

Upper Post

17%

43%

33%

7%

Calc Post

29%

32%

34%

5%

Calc Pre

22%

37%

37%

4%

Algebra Post

29%

32%

36%

3%

Algebra Pre

10%

90%

-

-

Upper Post

26%

74%

-

-

Calc Post

37%

63%

-

-

Calc Pre

32%

68%

-

-

Algebra Post

35%

65%

-

-

Algebra Pre

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

84%

16%

-

-

Upper Post

71%

29%

-

-

Calc Post

72%

28%

-

-

Calc Pre

72%

28%

-

-

Algebra Post

73%

27%

-

-

Algebra Pre

64%

36%

-

-

Upper Post

69%

31%

-

-

Calc Post

66%

34%

-

-

Calc Pre

71%

29%

-

-

Algebra Post

72%

28%

-

-

Algebra Pre

89%

9%

2%

0%

Upper Post

72%

17%

6%

6%

Calc Post

79%

12%

6%

3%

Calc Pre

75%

16%

7%

3%

Algebra Post

78%

13%

3%

6%

Algebra Pre

8%

3%

89%

0%

Upper Post

17%

13%

69%

2%

Calc Post

7%

12%

78%

3%

Calc Pre

7%

14%

77%

2%

Algebra Post

7%

11%

78%

5%

Algebra Pre

93%

3%

3%

0%

Upper Post

78%

11%

7%

3%

Calc Post

72%

14%

12%

2%

Calc Pre

81%

12%

7%

1%

Algebra Post

73%

14%

11%

2%

Algebra Pre

12%

80%

6%

2%

Upper Post

16%

78%

6%

1%

Calc Post

17%

70%

10%

4%

Calc Pre

14%

79%

6%

1%

Algebra Post

14%

77%

6%

3%

Algebra Pre

84%

3%

11%

1%

Upper Post

23%

10%

62%

5%

Calc Post

14%

8%

74%

4%

Calc Pre

21%

10%

68%

1%

Algebra Post

14%

13%

68%

5%

Algebra Pre

8%

92%

-

-

Upper Post

25%

75%

-

-

Calc Post

24%

76%

-

-

Calc Pre

23%

77%

-

-

Algebra Post

30%

70%

-

-

Algebra Pre

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

22%

78%

-

-

Upper Post

52%

48%

-

-

Calc Post

63%

37%

-

-

Calc Pre

46%

54%

-

-

Algebra Post

57%

43%

-

-

Algebra Pre

84%

16%

-

-

Upper Post

69%

31%

-

-

Calc Post

70%

30%

-

-

Calc Pre

79%

21%

-

-

Algebra Post

71%

29%

-

-

Algebra Pre

3%

89%

7%

1%

Upper Post

10%

64%

24%

1%

Calc Post

24%

28%

43%

5%

Calc Pre

15%

52%

33%

1%

Algebra Post

21%

27%

49%

4%

Algebra Pre

6%

87%

7%

1%

Upper Post

10%

61%

27%

2%

Calc Post

10%

32%

54%

5%

Calc Pre

13%

44%

41%

2%

Algebra Post

17%

23%

59%

2%

Algebra Pre

9%

78%

12%

1%

Upper Post

17%

54%

26%

3%

Calc Post

14%

29%

51%

6%

Calc Pre

14%

38%

44%

3%

Algebra Post

11%

30%

53%

7%

Algebra Pre

12%

75%

10%

2%

Upper Post

30%

43%

20%

7%

Calc Post

39%

34%

24%

3%

Calc Pre

37%

44%

15%

4%

Algebra Post

37%

35%

24%

4%

Algebra Pre

64%

24%

7%

6%

Upper Post

48%

26%

22%

4%

Calc Post

34%

36%

26%

4%

Calc Pre

28%

39%

28%

5%

Algebra Post

27%

44%

26%

3%

Algebra Pre

81%

11%

4%

3%

Upper Post

65%

19%

11%

4%

Calc Post

46%

28%

22%

5%

Calc Pre

55%

24%

16%

5%

Algebra Post

47%

26%

21%

6%

Algebra Pre

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

61%

4%

35%

0%

Upper Post

39%

20%

38%

3%

Calc Post

50%

23%

25%

3%

Calc Pre

54%

22%

23%

1%

Algebra Post

55%

19%

25%

1%

Algebra Pre

52%

45%

3%

0%

Upper Post

49%

28%

19%

4%

Calc Post

48%

27%

20%

4%

Calc Pre

56%

26%

15%

4%

Algebra Post

50%

27%

17%

7%

Algebra Pre

69%

22%

6%

3%

Upper Post

49%

27%

23%

2%

Calc Post

34%

32%

30%

4%

Calc Pre

40%

35%

21%

4%

Algebra Post

36%

38%

25%

1%

Algebra Pre

88%

7%

2%

3%

Upper Post

55%

22%

20%

3%

Calc Post

58%

22%

17%

4%

Calc Pre

58%

20%

19%

3%

Algebra Post

59%

20%

18%

3%

Algebra Pre

14%

83%

2%

1%

Upper Post

38%

40%

18%

4%

Calc Post

44%

34%

19%

4%

Calc Pre

34%

47%

17%

2%

Algebra Post

38%

41%

17%

4%

Algebra Pre

14%

70%

9%

7%

Upper Post

24%

55%

17%

4%

Calc Post

17%

55%

23%

5%

Calc Pre

18%

61%

17%

4%

Algebra Post

18%

58%

19%

6%

Algebra Pre

60%

22%

15%

3%

Upper Post

32%

41%

25%

2%

Calc Post

34%

44%

20%

2%

Calc Pre

25%

51%

20%

4%

Algebra Post

27%

50%

21%

2%

Algebra Pre

29%

45%

20%

7%

Upper Post

29%

48%

19%

4%

Calc Post

28%

42%

25%

6%

Calc Pre

25%

48%

21%

6%

Algebra Post

30%

46%

21%

4%

Algebra Pre

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

71%
67%
75%
70%
77%
7%
21%
15%
17%
15%
79%
40%
37%
48%
39%
85%
40%
38%
49%
35%
85%
35%
30%
43%
30%
10%
36%
40%
34%

23%
25%
16%
21%
14%
13%
17%
11%
17%
17%
9%
23%
24%
23%
19%
7%
24%
25%
22%
25%
7%
15%
14%
13%
19%
90%
64%
60%
66%

5%
4%
5%
7%
7%
78%
60%
72%
63%
66%
11%
30%
30%
24%
31%
6%
26%
29%
23%
30%
8%
47%
54%
43%
49%
-

1%
3%
4%
2%
3%
2%
2%
2%
3%
3%
1%
8%
9%
5%
11%
2%
9%
8%
6%
11%
0%
3%
2%
1%
2%
-

Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre
Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre
Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre
Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre
Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre
Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post

48%
21%
56%
55%
52%
59%

52%
79%
44%
45%
48%
41%

-

-

Algebra Pre
Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre

87%
68%
70%
67%
65%

13%
32%
30%
33%
35%

-

-

Upper Post
Calc Post
Calc Pre
Algebra Post
Algebra Pre

APPENDIX C: STUDENT PERFORMANCE ON EACH QUESTION FOR ONLINE ADMINISTRATION
Appendix C shows the distribution of answer choices for each group on each question when the survey was
given online.
TABLE IV. Average percentage scores for each of the four choices for each item for online administration of the STPFaSL-Long
instrument for each group after instruction in relevant concepts. Abbreviations for various student groups: Upper (students in
junior/senior level thermodynamics and physics Ph.D. students in their first semester of a Ph.D. program who had also only taken
the junior/senior level thermodynamics course), Calc (students in introductory calculus-based physics courses), Algebra (students
in introductory algebra-based physics courses). The four columns after the item number show the percentage of students who
selected choices A-D for each item. The number of students in each group is the same as in Table II.

Item #
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

A

B

C

D

Level

18%

5%

68%

9%

Upper Post

25%

3%

64%

8%

Calc Post

33%

7%

55%

5%

Algebra Post

50%

20%

27%

3%

Upper Post

61%

10%

27%

2%

Calc Post

46%

20%

31%

3%

Algebra Post

52%

31%

12%

5%

Upper Post

65%

20%

13%

3%

Calc Post

51%

26%

19%

4%

Algebra Post

12%

58%

27%

3%

Upper Post

16%

57%

24%

2%

Calc Post

21%

44%

33%

2%

Algebra Post

20%

34%

43%

3%

Upper Post

22%

57%

20%

2%

Calc Post

22%

50%

26%

1%

Algebra Post

81%

11%

3%

4%

Upper Post

86%

7%

5%

2%

Calc Post

72%

14%

11%

3%

Algebra Post

30%

45%

22%

3%

Upper Post

30%

50%

16%

4%

Calc Post

24%

43%

31%

2%

Algebra Post

40%

9%

45%

6%

Upper Post

19%

7%

71%

2%

Calc Post

24%

12%

59%

5%

Algebra Post

20%

26%

39%

14%

Upper Post

25%

16%

51%

8%

Calc Post

31%

23%

40%

6%

Algebra Post

18%

70%

13%

0%

Upper Post

11%

82%

6%

1%

Calc Post

20%

70%

8%

2%

Algebra Post

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

23%

62%

8%

7%

Upper Post

12%

77%

7%

4%

Calc Post

21%

63%

12%

4%

Algebra Post

33%

22%

35%

10%

Upper Post

39%

9%

48%

4%

Calc Post

41%

15%

41%

2%

Algebra Post

12%

6%

78%

4%

Upper Post

11%

13%

75%

1%

Calc Post

13%

17%

69%

2%

Algebra Post

6%

87%

7%

0%

Upper Post

5%

82%

12%

1%

Calc Post

10%

75%

14%

1%

Algebra Post

87%

7%

5%

1%

Upper Post

83%

9%

6%

1%

Calc Post

76%

13%

10%

2%

Algebra Post

19%

72%

7%

1%

Upper Post

15%

71%

13%

1%

Calc Post

16%

69%

12%

2%

Algebra Post

78%

2%

17%

3%

Upper Post

52%

7%

38%

3%

Calc Post

37%

9%

51%

2%

Algebra Post

15%

85%

-

-

Upper Post

14%

86%

-

-

Calc Post

25%

75%

-

-

Algebra Post

32%

68%

-

-

Upper Post

37%

63%

-

-

Calc Post

32%

68%

-

-

Algebra Post

85%

15%

-

-

Upper Post

75%

25%

-

-

Calc Post

76%

24%

-

-

Algebra Post

10%

86%

4%

1%

Upper Post

12%

78%

10%

1%

Calc Post

20%

70%

10%

1%

Algebra Post

51%

28%

19%

2%

Upper Post

57%

32%

8%

3%

Calc Post

45%

37%

16%

2%

Algebra Post

61%

10%

25%

3%

Upper Post

67%

14%

17%

2%

Calc Post

53%

17%

28%

2%

Algebra Post

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

57%

38%

3%

2%

Upper Post

75%

17%

6%

2%

Calc Post

68%

20%

10%

1%

Algebra Post

13%

6%

81%

1%

Upper Post

9%

7%

83%

1%

Calc Post

15%

17%

66%

1%

Algebra Post

31%

36%

27%

6%

Upper Post

35%

44%

19%

3%

Calc Post

36%

42%

20%

2%

Algebra Post

44%

56%

-

-

Upper Post

50%

50%

-

-

Calc Post

60%

40%

-

-

Algebra Post

82%

18%

-

-

Upper Post

79%

21%

-

-

Calc Post

77%

23%

-

-

Algebra Post

85%

15%

-

-

Upper Post

89%

11%

-

-

Calc Post

76%

24%

-

-

Algebra Post

26%

74%

-

-

Upper Post

34%

66%

-

-

Calc Post

38%

62%

-

-

Algebra Post

82%

18%

-

-

Upper Post

89%

11%

-

-

Calc Post

82%

18%

-

-

Algebra Post

23%

77%

-

-

Upper Post

20%

80%

-

-

Calc Post

30%

70%

-

-

Algebra Post

8%

88%

4%

1%

Upper Post

8%

85%

6%

1%

Calc Post

12%

78%

10%

1%

Algebra Post

11%

22%

61%

6%

Upper Post

8%

22%

65%

5%

Calc Post

16%

26%

56%

3%

Algebra Post

25%

75%

-

-

Upper Post

20%

80%

-

-

Calc Post

32%

68%

-

-

Algebra Post

24%

22%

24%

30%

Upper Post

17%

12%

23%

47%

Calc Post

14%

19%

23%

44%

Algebra Post

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

69%

31%

-

-

Upper Post

71%

29%

-

-

Calc Post

60%

40%

-

-

Algebra Post

25%

75%

-

-

Upper Post

17%

83%

-

-

Calc Post

28%

72%

-

-

Algebra Post

32%

68%

-

-

Upper Post

31%

69%

-

-

Calc Post

42%

58%

-

-

Algebra Post

11%

72%

13%

4%

Upper Post

7%

73%

15%

4%

Calc Post

16%

60%

18%

5%

Algebra Post

17%

55%

20%

8%

Upper Post

17%

48%

28%

7%

Calc Post

18%

45%

32%

6%

Algebra Post

13%

9%

77%

1%

Upper Post

12%

9%

77%

2%

Calc Post

21%

21%

57%

2%

Algebra Post

56%

40%

4%

1%

Upper Post

77%

14%

8%

2%

Calc Post

60%

24%

15%

1%

Algebra Post

7%

79%

11%

3%

Upper Post

11%

74%

10%

5%

Calc Post

20%

58%

19%

4%

Algebra Post

7%

58%

30%

5%

Upper Post

13%

44%

32%

11%

Calc Post

21%

38%

36%

6%

Algebra Post

15%

85%

-

-

Upper Post

18%

82%

-

-

Calc Post

37%

63%

-

-

Algebra Post

83%

17%

-

-

Upper Post

85%

15%

-

-

Calc Post

73%

27%

-

-

Algebra Post

75%

25%

-

-

Upper Post

86%

14%

-

-

Calc Post

77%

23%

-

-

Algebra Post

78%

13%

5%

3%

Upper Post

74%

18%

7%

1%

Calc Post

62%

25%

11%

2%

Algebra Post

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

16%

8%

73%

3%

Upper Post

12%

13%

74%

1%

Calc Post

15%

22%

61%

2%

Algebra Post

88%

8%

4%

1%

Upper Post

83%

9%

7%

1%

Calc Post

72%

15%

12%

1%

Algebra Post

16%

78%

6%

1%

Upper Post

11%

73%

15%

1%

Calc Post

17%

69%

12%

2%

Algebra Post

75%

7%

16%

2%

Upper Post

51%

9%

38%

2%

Calc Post

38%

14%

45%

2%

Algebra Post

16%

84%

-

-

Upper Post

19%

81%

-

-

Calc Post

26%

74%

-

-

Algebra Post

31%

69%

-

-

Upper Post

35%

65%

-

-

Calc Post

33%

67%

-

-

Algebra Post

85%

15%

-

-

Upper Post

82%

18%

-

-

Calc Post

77%

23%

-

-

Algebra Post

7%

69%

24%

0%

Upper Post

5%

75%

19%

1%

Calc Post

12%

64%

23%

1%

Algebra Post

5%

65%

29%

1%

Upper Post

6%

66%

25%

2%

Calc Post

10%

50%

37%

2%

Algebra Post

16%

62%

21%

1%

Upper Post

7%

78%

12%

2%

Calc Post

18%

62%

18%

2%

Algebra Post

18%

61%

21%

1%

Upper Post

15%

61%

18%

5%

Calc Post

25%

50%

23%

2%

Algebra Post

55%

26%

18%

1%

Upper Post

69%

15%

14%

2%

Calc Post

50%

25%

22%

3%

Algebra Post

62%

30%

7%

2%

Upper Post

80%

10%

6%

4%

Calc Post

59%

23%

15%

3%

Algebra Post

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

58%

4%

37%

1%

Upper Post

69%

10%

20%

1%

Calc Post

56%

16%

26%

2%

Algebra Post

49%

43%

6%

2%

Upper Post

56%

32%

10%

2%

Calc Post

59%

29%

10%

2%

Algebra Post

62%

25%

12%

1%

Upper Post

70%

18%

10%

1%

Calc Post

55%

26%

17%

2%

Algebra Post

82%

6%

10%

2%

Upper Post

75%

12%

10%

3%

Calc Post

64%

18%

15%

3%

Algebra Post

15%

78%

4%

3%

Upper Post

22%

59%

15%

4%

Calc Post

29%

52%

16%

3%

Algebra Post

13%

69%

13%

5%

Upper Post

12%

64%

18%

7%

Calc Post

15%

63%

18%

4%

Algebra Post

45%

37%

14%

4%

Upper Post

57%

20%

22%

1%

Calc Post

42%

34%

21%

2%

Algebra Post

31%

50%

13%

6%

Upper Post

53%

31%

14%

2%

Calc Post

38%

43%

15%

3%

Algebra Post

70%

20%

8%

2%

Upper Post

73%

20%

5%

2%

Calc Post

63%

24%

12%

1%

Algebra Post

18%

16%

65%

1%

Upper Post

11%

16%

70%

2%

Calc Post

18%

25%

57%

1%

Algebra Post

73%

12%

11%

3%

Upper Post

66%

11%

19%

4%

Calc Post

53%

24%

21%

2%

Algebra Post

72%

12%

13%

3%

Upper Post

66%

9%

21%

4%

Calc Post

58%

17%

21%

4%

Algebra Post

78%

5%

16%

1%

Upper Post

61%

8%

30%

1%

Calc Post

45%

19%

35%

2%

Algebra Post

76

77

78

17%

83%

-

-

Upper Post

20%

80%

-

-

Calc Post

33%

67%

-

-

Algebra Post

32%

68%

-

-

Upper Post

31%

69%

-

-

Calc Post

41%

59%

-

-

Algebra Post

83%

17%

-

-

Upper Post

83%

17%

-

-

Calc Post

66%

34%

-

-

Algebra Post

APPENDIX D: STPFASL-LONG SURVEY POINT BISERIAL COEFFICIENT FOR IN-PERSON AND
ONLINE ADMINISTRATIONS

Point Biserial Coefficient

Appendix D shows the Point Biserial Coefficient for in-class and online administrations.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

20

40

60

80

Item Number

Point Biserial Coefficient

FIGURE 2. Point biserial coefficient, for each item for in-class administration.

1.0
0.8

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

20

40
Item Number

60

FIGURE 3: Point biserial coefficient for each item for online administration in Qualtrics.

80

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

B.-S. Eylon and F. Reif, Effects of knowledge organization on task performance, Cognition and Instruction
1, 5 (1984).
F. Reif, Millikan Lecture 1994: Understanding and teaching important scientific thought processes, Am. J.
Phys. 63, 17 (1995).
C. Singh, When physical intuition fails, Am. J. Phys. 70, 1103 (2002).
C. Singh, Assessing student expertise in introductory physics with isomorphic problems. II. Effect of some
potential factors on problem solving and transfer, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 4, 010105 (2008).
E. Yerushalmi, et al., What do students do when asked to diagnose their mistakes? Does it help them? I. An
atypical quiz context, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 8, 020109 (2012).
E. Yerushalmi, et al., What do students do when asked to diagnose their mistakes? Does it help them? II. A
more typical quiz context, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 8, 020110 (2012).
A. Maries, S.-Y. Lin and C. Singh, Challenges in designing appropriate scaffolding to improve students’
representational consistency: The case of a Gauss’s law problem, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 020103
(2017).
A. Maries and C. Singh, Do students benefit from drawing productive diagrams themselves while solving
introductory physics problems? The case of two electrostatics problems, Eur. J. Phys. 39, 015703 (2018).
S.-Y. Lin and C. Singh, Using isomorphic problems to learn introductory physics, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ.
Res. 7, 020104 (2011).
S.-Y. Lin and C. Singh, Effect of scaffolding on helping introductory physics students solve quantitative
problems involving strong alternative conceptions, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 11, 020105 (2015).
D. Hestenes, M. Wells and G. Swackhamer, Force Concept Inventory, Phys. Teach. 30, 141 (1992).
R. R. Hake, Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey of mechanics
test data for introductory physics courses, Am. J. Phys. 66, 64 (1998).
V. P. Coletta and J. A. Phillips, Interpreting FCI scores: Normalized gain, preinstruction scores, and scientific
reasoning ability, Am. J. Phys. 73, 1172 (2005).
R. Thornton and D. Sokoloff, Assessing student learning of Newton's laws: The Force and Motion
Conceptual Evaluation and the Evaluation of Active Learning Laboratory and Lecture Curricula, Am. J. Phys.
66, 338 (1998).
R. J. Beichner, Testing student interpretation of kinematics graphs, Am. J. Phys. 62, 750 (1994).
C. Singh and D. Rosengrant, Multiple-choice test of energy and momentum concepts, Am. J. Phys. 71, 607
(2003).
K. K. Mashood and V. A. Singh, Rotational kinematics of a rigid body about a fixed axis: Development and
analysis of an inventory, Eur. J. Phys. 36, 045020 (2015).
L. G. Rimoldini and C. Singh, Student understanding of rotational and rolling motion concepts, Phys. Rev.
ST Phys. Educ. Res. 1, 010102 (2005).
L. Ding, et al., Evaluating an electricity and magnetism assessment tool: Brief electricity and magnetism
assessment, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2, 010105 (2006).
D. P. Maloney, et al., Surveying students' conceptual knowledge of electricity and magnetism, Am. J. Phys.
69, S12 (2001).
C. Singh, Improving students' understanding of magnetism, In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE), https://peer.asee.org/3117 10.18260/1-2--3117, 1-16
(2008).
J. Li and C. Singh, Developing a magnetism conceptual survey and assessing gender differences in student
understanding of magnetism, AIP Conf. 1413, 43-46 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3679989.
J. Li and C. Singh, Developing and validating a conceptual survey to assess introductory physics students’
understanding of magnetism, Eur. J. Phys. 38, 025702 (2017).
P. V. Engelhardt and R. J. Beichner, Students' understanding of direct current resistive electrical circuits,
Am. J. Phys. 72, 98 (2004).
C. Singh, Student understanding of symmetry and Gauss’s law of electricity, Am. J. Phys. 74, 923 (2006).
C. Singh, Student understanding of symmetry and gauss’s law, AIP Conf. Proc. 790, 65 (2005).
PhysPort, https://www.physport.org/.
S. Yeo and M. Zadnik, Introductory thermal concept evaluation: Assessing students' understanding, Phys.
Teach. 39, 496 (2001).

[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]

[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]

H.-E. Chu, et al., Evaluation of students’ understanding of thermal concepts in everyday contexts, Int. J. Sci.
Educ. 34, 1509 (2012).
P. Wattanakasiwich, et al., Development and implementation of a conceptual survey in thermodynamics, Int.
J. Innov. Sci. Math. Educ. 21, 29 (2013).
K. C. Midkiff, T. Litzinger and D. L. Evans, Development of engineering thermodynamics concept inventory
instruments, 31st ASEE/IEEE Frontier in Education Conference, Reno, NV. (2001)
R. Streveler, et al., Rigorous methodology for concept inventory development: Using the assessment triangle
to develop and test the Thermal and Transport Science Concept Inventory (TTCI), Int. J. Eng. Educ. 27, 968
(2011).
K. D. Rainey, M. Vignal and B. R. Wilcox, Validation of a coupled, multiple response assessment for upperdivision thermal physics, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 18, 020116 (2022).
B. Brown and C. Singh, Development and validation of a conceptual survey instrument to evaluate students'
understanding of thermodynamics, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 17, 010104 (2021).
B. Brown, Developing and Assessing Research-Based Tools for Teaching Quantum Mechanics and
Thermodynamcis, PhD Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2015.
See Supplemental Material at http://link.aps.org/supplemental/10.1103/PhysRevPhysEducRes.19.020112
for the STPFaSL-Long instrument.
P. V. Engelhardt, An introduction to Classical Test Theory as applied to conceptual multiple-choice tests, in
Getting Started in PER, edited by C. Henderson and K. Harper (AAPT, College Park, MD, 2009), Reviews
in PER, Vol. 2.
B. W. Dreyfus, et al., Resource Letter TTSM-1: Teaching thermodynamics and statistical mechanics in
introductory physics, chemistry, and biology, Am. J. Phys. 83, 5 (2015).
M. E. Loverude, C. H. Kautz and P. R. L. Heron, Student understanding of the first law of thermodynamics:
Relating work to the adiabatic compression of an ideal gas, Am. J. Phys. 70, 137 (2002).
D. E. Meltzer, Investigation of students' reasoning regarding heat, work, and the first law of thermodynamics
in an introductory calculus-based general physics course, Am. J. Phys. 72, 1432 (2004).
C. H. Kautz, et al., Student understanding of the ideal gas law, Part I: A macroscopic perspective, Am. J.
Phys. 73, 1055 (2005).
M. J. Cochran and P. R. L. Heron, Development and assessment of research-based tutorials on heat engines
and the second law of thermodynamics, Am. J. Phys. 74, 734 (2006).
B. R. Bucy, J. R. Thompson and D. B. Mountcastle, What is entropy? Advanced undergraduate performance
comparing ideal gas processes, AIP Conf. Proc. 818, 81 (2006).
W. M. Christensen, D. E. Meltzer and C. A. Ogilvie, Student ideas regarding entropy and the second law of
thermodynamics in an introductory physics course, Am. J. Phys. 77, 907 (2009).
T. I. Smith, et al., Identifying student difficulties with entropy, heat engines, and the Carnot cycle, Phys. Rev.
ST Phys. Educ. Res. 11, 020116 (2015).
M. Malgieri, et al., Improving the connection between the microscopic and macroscopic approaches to
thermodynamics in high school, Phys. Educ. 51, 065010 (2016).
C. H. Kautz and G. Schmitz, Probing student understanding of basic concepts and principles in introductory
engineering thermodynamics, in Proceedings of ASME 2007 International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and Exposition. Vol. 473 (American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2007)
https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/IMECE/proceedings-abstract/IMECE2007/43009/473/325933.
P. L. Thomas and R. W. Schwenz, College physical chemistry students' conceptions of equilibrium and
fundamental thermodynamics, Journal of Research in Science Teaching 35, 1151 (1998).
E. Langbeheim, et al., Evolution in students' understanding of thermal physics with increasing complexity,
Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 9, 020117 (2013).
R. Leinonen, M. A. Asikainen and P. E. Hirvonen, University students explaining adiabatic compression of
an ideal gas-a new phenomenon in introductory thermal physics, Res. Sci. Educ. 42, 1165 (2012).
R. Leinonen, et al., Students' pre-knowledge as a guideline in the teaching of introductory thermal physics at
university, Eur. J. Phys. 30, 593 (2009).
D. E. Meltzer, Observations of general learning patterns in an upper-level thermal physics course, AIP Conf.
Proc 1179, 31 (2009).
K. Bain, et al., A review of research on the teaching and learning of thermodynamics at the university level,
Chem. Educ. Res. Pract. 15, 320 (2014).
H. Goldring and J. Osborne, Students' difficulties with energy and related concepts, Phys. Educ. 29, 26
(1994).

[55]

[56]
[57]
[58]

[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]

[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[76]
[77]
[78]

J. W. Clark, J. R. Thompson and D. B. Mountcastle, Comparing student conceptual understanding of
thermodynamics in physics and engineering, AIP Conf. Proc. 1513, 102 (2013)
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1063/1.4789662.
T. I. Smith, D. Mountcastle and J. Thompson, Student understanding of the Boltzmann factor, Phys. Rev. ST
Phys. Educ. Res. 11, 020123 (2015).
M. F. Granville, Student misconceptions in thermodynamics, J. Chem. Educ. 62, 847 (1985).
T. I. Smith, D. B. Mountcastle and J. R. Thompson, Identifying student difficulties with conflicting ideas in
statistical
mechanics,
AIP
Conf.
Proc.
1513,
386-389
(2013)
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1063/1.4789733.
T. Nilsson and H. Niedderer, An analytical tool to determine undergraduate students' use of volume and
pressure when describing expansion work and technical work, Chem. Educ. Res. Pract. 13, 348 (2012).
D. E. Meltzer, Investigation of student learning in thermodynamics and implications for instruction in
chemistry and engineering, AIP Conf. Proc. 883, 38 (2007).
J. M. Bennett and M. Sözbilir, A study of Turkish chemistry undergraduates' understanding of entropy, J.
Chem. Educ. 84, 1204 (2007).
H. Georgiou and M. D. Sharma, Does using active learning in thermodynamics lectures improve students’
conceptual understanding and learning experiences?, Eur. J. Phys. 36, 015020 (2014).
R. Leinonen, M. A. Asikainen and P. E. Hirvonen, Overcoming students' misconceptions concerning thermal
physics with the aid of hints and peer interaction during a lecture course, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 9,
020112 (2013).
A. Tongchai, et al., Consistency of students' conceptions of wave propagation: Findings from a conceptual
survey in mechanical waves, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 7, 020101 (2020).
B. Brown and C. Singh, Student understanding of the first law and second law of thermodynamics, Eur. J.
Phys. 42, 065702 (2021).
B. Brown and C. Singh, Student understanding of thermodynamic processes, variables and systems, Eur. J.
Phys. 43, 055705 (2022).
J. Kirk and M. Miller, Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research, (Sage, Newbury Park, California
1986).
J. M. Cortina, What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and applications, Journal of Applied
Psychology 78, 98 (1993).
L. Ding and R. Beichner, Approaches to data analysis of multiple-choice questions, Phys. Rev. ST Phys.
Educ. Res. 5, 020103 (2009).
R. R. Holden, Face Validity, in The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology, edited by I. B. Weiner and W. E.
Craighead (Wiley, Hoboken, New York, 2010), Vol. 4, https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470479216.corpsy0341.
E. Bardar, Development and analysis of spectroscopic learning tools and the light and spectroscopy concept
inventory for introductory college astronomy, Ph. D. Dissertation, Boston University, 2006.
K. Carey, K. Coco and J. Simons, Concurrent validity of clinicians' ratings of substance abuse among
psychiatric outpatients, Psychiatr. Serv. 47, 842 (1996).
P. Kline, A Handbook of Test Construction: Introduction to Psychometric Design, in (Ed.), DM Carter et
aL/Schizophrenia Research 16 (1995) 157 (London: Methuen 1986), pp. 581-586.
J. C. Nunnally, Psychometric Theory 3E, (Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 1994).
B. Van Dusen, et al., Online administration of research-based assessments, Am. J. Phys. 89, 7 (2021).
Effective Practices for Physics Programs (EP3), https://ep3guide.org.
K. Paullet, et al., Assessing Faculty Perceptions and Techniques to Combat Academic Dishonesty in Online
Courses, Inf. Syst. Educ. J. 14, 45 (2016).
D. P. Sullivan, An Integrated Approach to Preempt Cheating on Asynchronous, Objective, Online
Assessments in Graduate Business Classes, Online Learn J. 20, 195 (2016).

