www.nature.com/npjscilearn

ARTICLE

OPEN

DIY productive failure: boosting performance in a large
undergraduate biology course
Sunita G. Chowrira1, Karen M. Smith1, Patrick J. Dubois

1

and Ido Roll

1

Students in ﬁrst-year university courses often focus on mimicking application of taught procedures and fail to gain adequate
conceptual understanding. One potential approach to support meaningful learning is Productive Failure (PF). In PF, the
conventional instruction process is reversed so that learners attempt to solve challenging problems ahead of receiving explicit
instruction. While students often fail to produce satisfactory solutions (hence “Failure”), these attempts help learners encode key
features and learn better from subsequent instruction (hence “Productive”). Effectiveness of PF was shown mainly in the context of
statistical and intuitive concepts, and lessons that are designed and taught by learning scientists. We describe a quasi-experiment
that evaluates the impact of PF in a large-enrollment introductory university-level biology course when designed and implemented
by the course instructors. One course-section (295 students) learned two topics using PF; another section (279 students) learned the
same topics using an active learning approach, which is the standard in this course. Performance was assessed on the subsequent
midterm exam, after all students had ample opportunities for practice and feedback, and after some time has elapsed. PF students
scored nearly ﬁve percentage-points higher on the relevant topics in the subsequent midterm exam. The effect was especially
strong for low-performing students. Improvement on the ﬁnal exam was only visible for low-performing students. We describe the
intervention and its potential to transform large introductory university courses.
npj Science of Learning (2019)4:1 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-019-0040-6

INTRODUCTION
Students beginning their university education often express the
sentiment that ﬁrst-year science is hard. One reason for the
difﬁculty is that students are now expected to apply and problemsolve using the factual information they have amassed.1–3 While
students may have managed to get through secondary school and
into university successfully using ineffective surface learning
approaches,4–6 these approaches are often not enough to succeed
in university courses. Biology, the largest undergraduate program
in the Faculty of Science at the University of British Columbia, has
its share of students struggling with conceptual understanding of
the fundamental concepts that form the foundations for more
advanced topics. To better prepare our students, we need to
provide ample opportunities that promote conceptual knowledge.
Rittle-Johnson et al.7 deﬁne conceptual knowledge as “understanding of the principles that govern a domain and of the
interrelations between units of knowledge in a domain.” It
requires students to synthesize new knowledge with existing
knowledge, leading to robust mental models that support transfer
of knowledge and ﬂexible application in areas other than that in
which it was learned.
Teaching that supports problem-solving and achieves conceptual understanding has been identiﬁed as a complex endeavor.
Incorporating active learning strategies, where students are
provided the opportunity to apply concepts as they learn them,
has been documented to be effective in promoting learning.8–11
Most innovative approaches to Biology teaching in recent years
are based on a constructivist framework,12–16 where the classroom
1
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
Correspondence: Sunita G Chowrira (chowrira@mail.ubc.ca)
These authors contributed equally: Sunita G. Chowrira, Karen M. Smith

Received: 19 July 2017 Accepted: 26 October 2018

Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

instructions are structured around active learning approaches with
the intention of maximizing student learning.17
Successful implementation of active learning is not obvious and
requires intricate classroom choreography.18 It was found to be
especially challenging in large classrooms.17 Issues generally
inherent to classrooms in post-secondary institutions include
inadequate pre-class preparation, inactive or non-responsive
behaviors, discomfort with failure, and lack of motivation or
perseverance.
One pedagogy that is rarely used in higher education is
productive failure (PF). In PF, learners attempt to solve challenging
problems prior to receiving explicit instruction on the target
domain.19 While learners often fail to succeed in the task itself, it
prepares them for meaningful future learning.20–22
Several factors convinced us to evaluate the impact of PF. First,
PF focuses on conceptual understanding, future learning, and
transferability to new topics,19–23 which are all challenging tasks
for students in ﬁrst-year university. Second, PF seems to address
other important aspects of learning at post-secondary institutions,
such as fear of failing,24–26 and recovering from failure. It is
important to note that PF is a form of extreme active learning, and
active learning is typical for these classes. Learners work in small
groups and construct shared solutions by building on prior
knowledge and making sense of the challenges at hand,27
techniques that fall under the highest level of active learning,
‘Interactive’’, as deﬁned by Chi and Wylie.11 Could PF prove
effective even compared to standard best practice?
This study was conducted in a large-enrollment ﬁrst-year CellBiology course that is taken by thousands of students every year,

S.G. Chowrira et al.

2

1234567890():,;

Fig. 1

Flow-chart of active learning (AL) and productive failure (PF) implementation in the classroom for different sections

mostly from the Faculty of Science. Other students typically come
from Applied Science and Land and Food Systems. Based on
several years of performance data on exam questions that target
conceptual understanding, we identiﬁed key topic areas where
students consistently underperform. While most students perform
well on assessment questions at the lower Bloom’s cognitive
levels28 (e.g., deﬁne the process or list the steps involved), many
struggle with questions at the higher levels of Bloom’s taxonomy
(e.g., predict the outcome or interpret the reasons for the
observed data). Diagnostic use of an in-house concept inventory
(CI), the Transcription and Translation CI,29 further highlighted the
prevalent misconceptions in topic areas of replication of biological
information (DNA replication), and biological information ﬂow
(Transcription and Translation). Concept Inventories are validated
testing instruments,30,31 used routinely to identify alternate
conceptions or misconceptions among students. They evaluate
conceptual knowledge by focusing on meaning making and
relationships between concepts, rather than procedural problemsolving. In the target course, the Transcription and Translation CI
helped identify the fundamental concepts underlying the two
topic areas that we then chose for the PF study: DNA replication
and Transcription and Translation. The identiﬁed concepts in these
two topic areas that students struggle with, include the structural
directionality of the genetic material, functional directionality of
the process of Transcription and Translation, and the context of
the consensus regions within the genetic sequence that dictate
the accuracy, feasibility and ﬁdelity of the start and stop of the
processes.
The target course has several sections that are typically taught
using shared materials and approaches (even if by different
instructors). Every week, students are assigned a pre-reading and a
pre-reading quiz, to introduce students to the topic and the
relevant terms ahead of class. For the two topics mentioned
above, we compared the PF classroom approach to the active
learning (AL) approach, and implemented them in two of the
sections in the course as described below. The instructor of one of
these sections was interested in evaluating PF in that section; a
second instructor agreed to share data from their section as a
comparison group. All students in these sections, who attended
class during the activities and the assessments, were included in
the study.
npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

PF IMPLEMENTATION
As done every week, students were asked to read the relevant
chapter prior to class and complete the pre-reading quiz. Class
time was modeled after the PF cycle32 and contained two main
phases, an Exploration phase and a Consolidation phase. The ﬁrst
part of the class time (~25 min), the Exploration phase, was
devoted to student problem-solving activity in small groups (see
Fig. 1). The activities were designed at higher cognitive levels of
Bloom’s taxonomy, involving data interpretations, outcome
predictions, and deliberately designed to be challenging. During
the problem-solving activity phase, students worked in groups of
2 to 4, with minimal or no introduction to the topics other than
the previously assigned pre-reading for the class. Student
responses were collected at the end of the activity. This was
followed by the Consolidation phase. First, students were
provided with formative feedback (~5 min, immediately following
the activity). During this part, the student responses collected
from the activity were used as options for a set of classroomresponse (aka “Clicker”) questions. This enabled the instructor to
provide immediate formative feedback on example work produced by the students. Remaining class time was devoted to a
Walkthrough (~20 min), to close the learning loop. During this
part, the instructor modeled an expert’s way of approaching the
activity, while continuing to involve students in this process by
prompting and eliciting their contribution to the problem-solving
path.
AL IMPLEMENTATION
Similar to the PF condition, students in AL condition were asked to
read the relevant chapter prior to class, and to complete the prereading quiz. The ﬁrst part of the class time was used by the
instructor to introduce the concept (Walkthrough; lower part of
Fig. 1), and work through an example problem related to the
concept, interleaved with Clicker questions (~25–30 min. of class
time). Prior to responding to the Clicker questions, students were
given ample opportunities to actively engage with the materials
being presented, in the form of group discussions. The remaining
part of the class time (~20–25 min.) was devoted to practicing
problem-solving, where students worked in groups to solve
problems similar to the example seen during the ﬁrst part of the
class, and received formative feedback on their work. The
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

S.G. Chowrira et al.

3

Fig. 2

Parallel structure of sections, showing variation in teaching technique (active learning (AL) vs. productive failure (PF)) for two topics

problems were similar to the ones used with the PF group:
designed at higher cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy,
involving data interpretations, outcome predictions, and
challenging.
Notably, all other topics in the course were implemented using
a similar approach to the AL instruction described above (see Fig.
2). While the sections had different instructors, the teaching team
collaborated on shared resources and administered common
exams.
The implementation described above differs from most
previous PF studies in several important aspects. First, this study
is in the life sciences domain. Many PF studies to date have taken
place in the domain of statistics. The use of statistics focuses on
topics in which intuition can play a role, such as variance. This
creates an affordance to evaluate students’ invented methods,
identify their shortcomings, and learn from their failures.
Exploratory PF studies in process engineering,33 climate science,34
physics,35 and math,36 offer similar insights. Loibl et al.22 call for
evaluation of PF in broader domains, as done here. It is unclear
whether PF works in a topic that requires more expertize and
offers fewer opportunities for using one’s intuition and life
experiences as baseline for evaluation.
Another contextual difference from most prior literature is the
population. Most PF studies to date were implemented with K-12
learners.22 In contrast, the current study was implemented with
university students. We have identiﬁed a few studies that
evaluated PF with university students,33,36–39 however, none of
these were in a typical life sciences classroom setting. Implementing PF in this context has unique challenges. First, instructors and
students alike may perceive the classic lecture to be efﬁcient and
sufﬁcient. Further, they may perceive students to be expert
learners who do not need to invest time in complex designs such
as PF. From an attitudinal perspective, university students may
have worse dispositions towards failure, as, simply put, they are
not used to failing. Altogether with high anxiety caused by the
transition from high-school to university, PF may be perceived to
have detrimental effects on their learning.
A third difference is our use of pre-reading assignments to preexpose students to the target concepts. While this aspect of PF
differs from other common implementations of PF (cf. Loibl
et al.22), it builds on common practices in science classes in higher
education. Students often come to class underprepared. Targeted
pre-reading assignments, which were used here, support students
in activating relevant prior knowledge and acquiring basic
vocabulary to be elaborated and built upon during class time.40
Indeed, these are also preconditions of successful PF activities.32
The high pace of college classes, as well as the speciﬁcity of their
vocabulary, introduced a need to expose students to the language
in order to allow them to construct meaningful (albeit wrong or
partial) solutions. The pre-reading assignment was incorporated to
help students come prepared to the class activity. Thus, while the
practice of pre-reading is not common to PF studies, it helped us
adhere to the principles behind PF. Notably, students in both
conditions received the same pre-reading assignment. In both
cases, it is perceived as a preparatory activity and does not replace
classroom activities or lectures.
Yet another important aspect of our implementation is that of
the non-PF comparison condition. Students in the comparison
group of the present study received highly effective active
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

learning instruction that had been reﬁned over several years, as
supported by the Science Education Initiative at the university.18
AL in higher education means that rather than following a lengthy
lecture with a duration of practice, practice and support are
intertwined and interleaved, and short instructional periods build
upon matching activities (for instance, using worksheets and
Clickers). Thus, students in this study’s comparison condition
received what is believed to be better instruction than passively
listening to a lecture (often referred to as Direct Instruction11). We
found very few studies that contrasted PF with a similar form of
AL. Several studies have contrasted design features within PF (cf.,
Loibl and Rummel41 for PF with or without contrasting cases;
Kapur,42 Kapur and Bielaczyc,43 and Roll et al.44 for the need for
design as part of PF; and Roll and colleagues23,45 for metacognitive support given during PF). However, as far as we know, only
one study (Kapur46) contrasted PF with AL that provides active
feedback and guidance to learners. In that study, Kapur46
compared learning from PF with learning from similar activities
in which the instructor actively guides the students through the
process, providing feedback, and highlighting conceptual errors.
Kapur found that students who struggled in the PF condition
outperformed their peers who received more support and were
guided through their problem-solving. Here, we seek to evaluate a
similar comparison in another context. It may be that part of the
success of PF has to do with facilitating more active learning
compared with the passive Direct Instruction.11,16 The current
study compares two forms of active learning in post-secondary
Life Sciences classrooms.
Perhaps the most important difference between this study and
previous studies is the role of the researcher. Previously, most
studies were designed by researchers who are familiar with the
theory behind PF. Being a complex topic that requires disciplinary
expertise, instruction in the present study was designed and
implemented by the course instructors, and the ﬁdelity of PF
implementation was achieved through an iterative process.
Implementation by instructors (disciplinary experts) is an important hurdle that novel pedagogies should clear before they can be
considered relevant to a wider audience. From an ecological
validity perspective, do students beneﬁt from PF when designed
by the course instructor and compared against good classroom
teaching? From an external validity perspective, what are the
boundaries of PF—speciﬁcally, does it produce the expected
results also in the context of post-secondary biology learning?
Thus, overall, our research question in this study is one of
scalability and validity.
RESULTS
Sample characteristics
We gathered complete course data for 574 students: 295 in the PF
condition, and 279 in the AL condition. Overall, 32% self-identiﬁed
as male, and 96% were in their ﬁrst or second year of university.
No signiﬁcant relationship was found between university year and
grades, but those enrolled in the Faculty of Science showed a
general advantage in grades, of 15.95 ***p < 0.001, 95% CI = [9.25,
22.64], t(391.98) = 4.68; d = 0.42.
Between conditions, there were no signiﬁcant differences by
gender or university year, but students in the Faculty of Science
were more likely to be in the PF condition, χ2(1, N = 574) = 10.85,
npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

S.G. Chowrira et al.

4
Table 1.

Raw exam scores, by condition, showing mean (standard deviation)
Study items

Condition

N

Midterm 2

Other items
Final

Midterm 1

Midterm 2

Final

AL (active learning)

279

67.96 (19.81)

66.09 (28.11)

76.23 (12.18)

73.50 (15.82)

64.15 (17.89)

PF (productive failure)

295

73.97 (19.35)

74.31 (25.13)

81.38 (11.08)

71.98 (14.54)

71.78 (17.22)

p < 0.001. This difference was coincidental and went unnoticed
until analysis of study data. Possibly due to differences in sample
composition, signiﬁcant differences (by condition) were observed
in regular course exam marks (unrelated to the study). On
those marks, students in the PF condition outperformed their
counterparts on Midterm 1 (5.14 ***p < 0.001, 95% CI = [3.23,
7.06], t(559.31) = 5.28; d = 0.44) and ﬁnal exam (7.63 ***p < 0.001,
95% CI = [4.75, 10.52], t(567.02) = 5.20; d = 0.44), but not on
Midterm 2, (−1.51, p = 0.23, 95% CI = [-4.01, 0.98], t(561.03) =
−1.19; d = −0.10), as shown in Table 1. In order to account for
these differences, performance on these “other’’ items served as
covariates in our model.
Effects of condition on learning
Student performance on the midterm and ﬁnal exams was
analyzed, blind to condition. The differences described above
were not unexpected for a quasi-experimental student sample. To
isolate the effects of learning condition on student performance,
we used linear regression to predict scores (0–100) on topics where
teaching approach varied, controlling for scores on Midterm 1,
gender, university year, enrollment in the science program, and
exam scores for questions in the same exam on topics where
teaching was not varied (referred to as “other items”). Thus,
differences between student populations or instructors, as
reﬂected by performance on other items, were accounted for,
isolating the impact of PF vs. AL on the studied topics. For Midterm
2, (following the implementation of PF) the resulting coefﬁcient for
the PF condition was signiﬁcant, b = 4.78, 95% CI [2.19, 7.36], t
(567) = 3.63, p < 0.001, with an effect size of 0.32, 95% CI [0.15,
0.49] (derived by dividing the coefﬁcient by the residual standard
error). This shows that students in the PF condition had grades for
those topics almost ﬁve percentage-points higher (Fig. 3). The
overall model ﬁt was R2 = 0.43, F(6,567) = 71.95, p < 0.001, which
means that 43% of those condition-topic scores could be explained
by this model. To account for the large number of covariates, we
ran regression models with stepwise variable selection. Results
were nearly identical to those reported above, and thus we focus
on the more straightforward, comprehensible, and complete
model.
A similar analysis was conducted for the ﬁnal exam, but
condition effects were much smaller and failed to reach statistical
signiﬁcance, with the difference in topic grades (on the ﬁnal exam,
controlled for non-topic scores on the ﬁnal) being b = 0.78, 95% CI
[−2.80, 4.36], t(567) = 0.43, p = 0.668.
Condition effects by student ability
Next, we evaluated the dependency of this effect on student
ability. We used Midterm 1, which took place before the
manipulation, as a proxy of student ability. We then split our
sample into three parts by ability, with the lower being at or below
the 33rd percentile (a grade of 75%) and the upper being at or
above the 67th percentile (a grade of 85%).
The sub-sample sizes and resulting regression coefﬁcients for
the PF condition (representing difference in topic marks for
Midterm 2, controlled as above) are shown in Table 2. For Lowachieving students, the effect of PF is the largest. In fact, as seen in
the b value, low-achieving students in the PF group scored eight
npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

Fig. 3 Adjusted mean study item grades (0–100) and Standard Error
by Condition, controlling for gender, university year, program,
Midterm 1 grades and Midterm 2 non-study items. Error bars show
standard error. ***p < .001

points higher than their counterparts in the AL group, even after
controlling for gender, faculty, year, and performance on other
items. This effect is considerable for that group.
The effect of PF on Med and High achieving students does not
reach signiﬁcance, likely because splitting the population reduces
statistical power. As the coefﬁcients for Med and High were
similar, we examined the combined data for these two groups.
The coefﬁcient for the combined group reaches signiﬁcance, b =
3.25, 95% CI [0.07, 6.43], t(373) = 2.01, p = 0.045. This suggests
that the PF technique beneﬁtted the lower-performing students
more than twice as much, yet still had a positive effect on higher
performing students.
A similar split pattern emerged for effects on ﬁnal exam scores.
The effect of condition was marginally signiﬁcant for lowerperforming students, where PF outperformed AL by almost seven
points. This effect did not reach signiﬁcance for high performing
students (Table 3).
DISCUSSION
Our quasi-experiment showed that PF instruction yields better
performance, compared with the conventional AL approach, on
the exam following the manipulation (Midterm 2). This trend
persisted for low-performing students also on the ﬁnal exam, but
was virtually eliminated for better performing students.
As commonly observed in quasi-experiments, differences
between conditions existed in the outset, as shown for Midterm
1 and the other items on the Final exam (due to sample
characteristics, instructor, or a combination of factors). As we
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

S.G. Chowrira et al.

5
Table 2.

Productive failure (PF) increase on Midterm 2 by ternary split of ability

Ability

NPF + NAL = N

PF increase

Low

84 + 110 = 194

b = 8.28, 95% CI [3.68, 12.89], t(187) = 3.55, p < 0.001

Med

92 + 97 = 189

b = 3.26, 95% CI [−1.67, 8.18], t(182) = 1.31, p = 0.193

High

119 + 72 = 191

b = 3.37, 95% CI [−0.71, 7.45], t(184) = 1.63, p = 0.105

Table 3.

Productive failure (PF) increase on Final exam by ternary split

of ability
Ability

PF increase

Low
Med

b = 6.83, 95% CI [–0.29, 13.94], t(187) = 1.89, p = 0.060
b = –3.87, 95% CI [–10.19, 2.45], t(182) = –1.21, p = 0.229

High

b = 0.55, 95% CI [–4.79, 5.88], t(184) = 0.20, p = 0.840

control for performance on these items, the beneﬁt of PF on
manipulated items needed to be much larger in order to surpass
other differences. Thus, the results presented here are a
conservative estimate of the true value in PF.
Notably, students had considerable exposure to study topics
following study and before the test. All students received practice
problems, and all had time to prepare for Midterm 2, with several
weeks between manipulation and testing. Thus, the effect of PF
instruction in this study was long-term and fairly robust, compared
to previous PF studies involving immediate post-tests. In fact, the
effect of PF on low-achieving students also carried forward to the
ﬁnal exam, as discussed further below.
While PF instruction proved fruitful in Midterm 2, the effect was
much smaller by the ﬁnal exam. There are several potential
explanations for this. It may be that the condition-topic questions
on the ﬁnal exam were too few and/or did not capture ability as
well as the Midterm 2 condition-topic questions. An alternative
explanation is one of decay, that is, the PF effect simply faded over
time. A third likely explanation has to do with exposure. All
students had ample opportunities to practice these concepts in
subsequent tutorials, and thus bring their knowledge to a similar
level regardless of initial instruction. The most likely explanation is
that, being a ﬁnal exam, students study for it and strategically
focus their attention on topics that they know less. Thus,
differences that might have existed between conditions were all
but eliminated by students’ independent learning. The fact that
students who performed lower on Midterm 1 still showed effect
for PF also on the Final exam may strengthen this explanation, as
these students are evidently less successful learners in this course.
Further research on temporal aspects of PF, as well as its
interaction with student ability, is warranted.
Our results suggest that students who are more challenged in
the course (as reﬂected in Midterm 1) beneﬁted more from PF, on
both Midterm 2 and the Final exam. One possible explanation is
that learning from instruction is challenging and may be
cognitively overloading. Conceptual learning requires understanding of key concepts and how they ﬁt together. To avoid
cognitive overload during class time, all students were assigned
pre-reading in our study. It may be that pre-reading alone was not
sufﬁcient for low-performing students. Instead, the addition of
hands-on experiences helped them acquire basic tools with which
they could make meaning of subsequent instruction. Schwartz
et al.27 describe the beneﬁts of these expository activities to help
students construct relevant (prior) knowledge that assist them in
learning from future instruction. Similar results, in which lowerperforming students beneﬁt from exploring the solution space,
were also found in Geometry problem-solving47 and Physics
simulations.48 It is important to emphasize, though, that these
results are contingent on using Midterm 1 as a proxy for student
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

ability. Further research is warranted to evaluate the robustness of
this pattern.
Given that students in both conditions received support for
active learning, this aspect of PF is probably not to be attributed
for its success. If so, why did PF students outperform the AL
students? When explaining the effect of PF, Loibl et al.22 build on
Kapur and Bielaczyc32 to identify the following relevant mechanisms: prior knowledge activation, awareness of knowledge gaps,
and recognition of deep features. Active learning also seeks to
activate many of these mechanisms. Frequent classroom-response
(Clicker) questions encourage students to activate their prior
knowledge, and provide feedback to support awareness of
knowledge gaps. We attribute the difference in learning between
conditions in our study to two factors: depth of search and
availability of solution.
By depth of search we refer to students’ struggle to develop a
model that can solve the problems they are given. The quick
turnaround of classroom-response questions provides students
with feedback, but does not provide them with enough time to
fully understand the requirements of the problems (and the
limitations of their own solutions). This may lead to a difference in
the third mechanism identiﬁed by Loibl and colleagues, recognition of deep features. In addition, there is some evidence that selfgenerated feedback (as done in the PF condition during the ﬁrst
phase) may lead to better learning compared to only receiving
external feedback.49,50
The second signiﬁcant factor is the availability of the canonical
solution in the AL condition. Having a solution may encourage
students to accept it “at face value”, without dissecting its deep
structure, and without fully grasping its deep features.32,37,51
Our research question focused on ecological validity. Is PF
superior to AL in situations in which instructors create their own
version, in relatively complex (and less intuitive) topics?
Our Biology PF activity design (Fig. 1) was based on the design
guidelines from Kapur and Bielaczyc.32 For the “Exploration”
Phase, we developed problems that required students to access
and elicit prior knowledge, apply it in a novel context, seek out
appropriate resources, and generate and explore solutions with
minimal assistance from the teaching team. The problems were
designed to be challenging but not frustrating. In the topic area of
Transcription and Translation, for example, students were required
to access prior knowledge (from assigned pre-reading or from
what they learned in high-school Biology courses) about the steps
involved in the processes, the various structural parts needed for
the processes (requiring reasoning across orders of magnitude –
atomic to systems), the roles of the structural parts, and the
sequence in which the roles occurred (requiring reasoning across
ontological levels—e.g., DNA is information, a unit of inheritance,
and a physical entity52). During the Exploration phase of the PF
activity, accessing prior knowledge alone was not sufﬁcient.
Students also had to use the accessed knowledge appropriately
by asking relevant questions necessary for generating the
solutions on their own. This problem-solving phase provided
opportunities for students to explore the affordances and
constraints of multiple solutions.20 During this phase of struggle,
modest support was provided by the facilitating teaching team in
the classroom to help activate metacognitive processes and
prevent onset of the frustration phase. Support was given in the
form of prompts to focus students’ attention without providing
npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

S.G. Chowrira et al.

6

additional information, such as, “what information do you have in
the problem?”; “what other kind of information would you need in
order to continue the process?”; or “where might you ﬁnd this
information?.” This support helped students understand the
challenges and make progress, yet they mostly failed to construct
complete and correct solutions.
The Consolidation phase of the PF activity (our post-activity
Formative Feedback and Walkthrough phases) built on the
solutions produced by the students in Activity phase. The student
solutions, containing their mistakes, misconceptions, or gaps in
knowledge, were used as examples by the instructor to provide
feedback and to walkthrough the problems, in a logical, guided,
and expert-like manner. The consolidation phase provided the
students opportunities for comparing and contrasting, organizing,
and assembling the relevant student-generated solutions into
appropriate solutions.20
The study described above has several limitations. First and
foremost, our choice to focus on ecological validity limited our
ability to conduct a randomized controlled trial. Instead, this was a
quasi-experiment; both sections were taught by different instructors, and students self-selected into sections based on schedule
and other factors. For example, unexpectedly, the PF group had a
higher ratio of students from the Faculty of Science, who are
traditionally more successful in this course. Consequently, they
performed better on some measures of knowledge. We compensate for these variations statistically, by (i) controlling for
performance on a prior exam, (ii) controlling for person variables
of enrollment in the faculty of science, university year and gender,
and (iii) adding other items from the studied tests to our
measures. However, such variation may lead to indirect impact,
such as class dynamics. The fact that the results of this quasiexperiment echo earlier results (cf. Kapur46), suggests that sample
characteristics are not the main contributing factor.
Another limitation is the fact that only one instructor taught
using PF. As the study topics are highly discipline-speciﬁc,
instruction was designed solely by the instructor. However, this
was done with advice from a learning scientist, who provided
motivation, relevant literature, design principles, and general
emphases for the activity. This support however, was not speciﬁc
to the two activities, and feedback directly on the activities was
not provided. As the paper argues for a “Do-it-Yourself” (DIY)
approach for PF, future work will need to show how well this
transfers to additional instructors with even less support.
Lastly, our analysis by student performance relies on Midterm 1.
This is a single exam of limited scope, early in the term, and thus
these results are more suggestive than conclusive. Further study
into aptitude-treatment interaction are warranted.
Overall, results show that PF instruction helped all learners
achieve greater gains on a subsequent exam, even after several
weeks had passed and all students received additional exposure
to these topics. Results were especially positive for low-performing
students, for whom the beneﬁts of PF instruction lead to
improvement of nearly seven points on relevant topics in the
ﬁnal exam of the course. These results show the promise and
potential of PF in ﬁrst-year large-enrollment university courses
when implemented by the course instructor, and also as
compared with the use of alternative effective active learning
techniques.
METHODS
As the goal of this research was to replicate PF studies with high ecological
validity, a quasi-experimental approach was taken. Two simultaneous
sections of an undergraduate introductory biology course were chosen as
comparison groups, having similar numbers of students, equivalent
curricula, and shared materials. These two sections had identical syllabi,
textbooks, content order and exams: two midterms and a ﬁnal. Only two
topics of the course were explicitly varied in teaching technique; one
npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

section had those topics presented using AL techniques (like the rest of the
course), while the other section had the topics (and only those) presented
using PF. This difference in technique (our “condition”) was implemented
after Midterm 1, on topics that were evaluated (among others) during the
second midterm, Midterm 2 (see Fig. 2). Midterm 2 consisted of 27
multiple-choice questions, of which ten were about the condition topics
(Cronbach α for study items = 0.574). The ﬁnal exam consisted of 47
multiple-choice questions, of which ﬁve were about the condition topics
(Cronbach α for study items = 0.555).
The two topic areas—replication of biological information (DNA
replication), and biological information ﬂow (Transcription and Translation)—are complex key processes in cell biology. A broader understanding
of a number of other cellular processes can be linked to grasping the
concepts embedded in these topics. In each topic area, there are many
cellular parts (large and small molecules) at various steps; so that
understanding structure, function, and order is important. A common
approach in a traditional instructional design would introduce each step,
the parts in the process, and their related functions. Students could then
be assessed on each step and the overall product. The problem with this
approach is that students mainly memorize each step, the different parts
and their functions, rather than attempt to have a deeper understanding of
how they might all ﬁt together, how their speciﬁc roles might affect their
functions downstream, and how these might then relate to other
processes.
Our intent overall in this course was to steer students away from
procedural learning, and instead, have them work through the process
conceptually. Recall that, prior to each class, students in both AL and PF
conditions were assigned pre-class readings and quizzes. The implementation difference in the two conditions is described below:
The PF instructional approach (see Fig. 1) consisted of three phases:
Activity phase (the PF Exploration phase): Students were tasked with
working through a problem in small groups. The PF problems were
designed to be open-ended (e.g., show possible products when the
given stretch of DNA sequence might be transcribed and translated
within a cell), so that when given a starting point (e.g., a DNA sequence)
students would design the process to mimic a cell to yield the end
products. This required students to think deeply about what was
needed (parts), their roles (function), their order, and the process itself.
During the ﬁrst iteration of PF implementation, many students found
the task to be too difﬁcult and gave up on the activity out of sheer
frustration. Taking note of this, PF implementation was reﬁned to
include “moderate support” during subsequent iterations, to reach the
sweet spot where failure did not necessarily lead to students giving up
entirely. The challenge that students encountered was conceptual.
Students were aware of the general principles related to the process of
Transcription and Translation. However, the task required applying
these in the cellular context. This context has its own constraints and
affordances that deﬁne the Transcription and Translation process.
Understanding how the process unfolds in the cell was the challenging
component. Speciﬁcally, this is a very precise process, and thus students
needed to construct an accurate mental model of what is happening in
the cell. The “moderate support” provided looked something like this:
when students got stuck, they were asked to describe what information
they had and what other kind of information they would need in order
to continue the process, and where they might ﬁnd the information, i.e.,
activating metacognitive processes. With the Teaching Assistants
providing such occasional modest hints to help students get “unstuck”,
inevitably one or more student(s) in the group would have an “aha
moment” and help the rest in the group move past the sticking point.
Support helped students understand the challenge and move forward,
but still the ﬁnal output produced by most were inadequate and/or
inaccurate.
Formative Feedback (the PF Consolidation phase) on student work
(Fig. 1): At the end of the activity, completed student responses were
collected by the teaching staff. Although the collected responses were
not marked for correctness, the student material provided the teaching
team the opportunity to quickly review roughly what proportion of the
class were able to complete the activity, and where the students
struggled the most. The student responses in the collected activity
sheets also served as an excellent source of alternative answers for the
feedback Clicker activity. Occasionally, example responses from
previous iterations of the classes were used.
Walkthrough (the PF Consolidation phase): Seeing their mistakes and
the reasons for them during the formative feedback primed the

Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

S.G. Chowrira et al.
students for the Walkthrough phase, during which the expert’s
approach to solving the problem was modeled by the Instructor. This
process was essentially an interactive use of a worked-out example,53
where students were encouraged to contribute to the walkthrough.
In the AL instructional approach (see lower part of Fig. 1), class time was
divided into the following three components:
Walkthrough phase: Short instructional periods, interspersed with
student engagement components (e.g., “think-pair-share” or group
discussion before answering Clicker questions), was used to introduce
the topic and work through an example problem to highlight the
underlying concepts.
Activity phase: Students worked through a problem similar to the
example problem seen during the walkthrough phase, in groups.
Students in general, worked through the problems without requiring
much assistance from the teaching team. At the end of the activity,
student responses were collected.
Formative Feedback: The collected student responses were used as
examples to point out misconceptions or missing components, or the
extent of completeness, or they were used as distractors for Clicker
questions.
All exams (midterms and ﬁnal) were common to both the groups in the
study. The exam questions were designed to span the Bloom’s taxonomy.
While a few basic process/step questions required recall, many questions
on the exams required students to work through the steps, both forwards
and backwards, thus requiring application of the learned concepts. A few
questions presented a variation of the process that required analysis and
synthesis. For example, students were asked to predict how a process
might be impacted by a mutation or to predict the outcome with the
addition of a new molecule to the system.
The three exams (all multiple-choice) were administered as typical
course exams, with no special procedures related to this study. At no point
were students told they were being given a deliberate variation in
educational technique. Given that students typically experience a variety of
teaching approaches, and instructor personalities and values, it was
expected that, should any student confer with another from the other
section, any noted difference in technique could easily be attributed to the
normal variation students encounter when having different classes and
instructors. Thus, we expected no demand characteristics of our condition,
i.e., not knowing what we were up to, students would not react to it.
All exams were scored in the typical way, as the mean of question scores
for each student, framed herein as percentage correct (0–100). Due to the
small number of test items related to the two topics, and to maintain a
scale that is sufﬁciently consistent, questions for the two condition topics
were combined as one condition score for Midterm 2 and one for the Final.
To statistically isolate condition effects from across-section effects, we
used a simple linear regression model, predicting condition topic scores
(0–100) from a dummy variable for condition (PF = 1, AL = 0) plus gender
(male/female), university year (1–4), program (science or other), Midterm
1 scores (0–100) and same-exam scores (0–100) on other topics as control
variables. The regression coefﬁcient for this dummy variable then
represents the effect condition had on topic scores, controlling for the
other variables. A linear regression model was chosen since it is robust and
makes fewer assumptions regarding the data.
Methods were approved by the UBC Behavioral Research Ethics Board
(UBC BREB #: H14-02217). Methods were performed in accordance with
relevant regulations and guidelines. As part of the procedure, all students
consented for their data to be included in the study. They had the
opportunity to opt-out from the study, and none chose to do so.

DATA AVAILABILITY
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Ehleen Hinze for her contribution to the study. This work was
supported by the SoTL Seed Program of the Institute for Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning (ISoTL) at the University of British Columbia. We acknowledge the support
provided by the Science Center for Learning and Teaching, UBC Skylight for covering
partial costs associated with the dissemination of this work.

Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

7

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed substantially to developing and reviewing the manuscript. S.
G.C., K.M.S. and I.R. conceived and designed the study. K.M.S. executed the research
and collected the data. P.J.D. and I.R. analyzed the data. P.J.D. developed tables and
ﬁgures. S.G.C. and I.R. supervised the project.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

REFERENCES
1. Baum, D. A., Smith, S. D. & Donovan, S. S. The tree-thinking challenge. Science
310, 979–980 (2005).
2. Meir, E., Perry, J., Herron, J. C. & Kingsolver, J. College students’ misconceptions
about evolutionary trees. Am. Biol. Teach. 69, e71–e76 (2007).
3. Nehm, R. H. & Reilly, L. Biology majors’ knowledge and misconceptions of natural
selection. AIBS Bull. 57, 263–272 (2007).
4. Richardson, J. T. E. Students’ approaches to learning and teachers’ approaches to
teaching in higher education. Educ. Psychol. 25, 673–680 (2005).
5. Marton, F., Hounsell, D. & Entwistle, N. J. The Experience of Learning. (Scottish
Academic Press, Edinburgh, UK, 1984).
6. Biggs, J. & Tang, C. Teaching for Quality Learning at University. (McGraw-Hill
Education, Maidenhead, UK, 2011).
7. Rittle-Johnson, B., Siegler, R. S. & Alibali, M. W. Developing conceptual understanding and procedural skill in mathematics: An iterative process. J. Educ. Psychol. 93, 346 (2001).
8. Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L. & Cocking, R. R. How people learn: Brain, mind,
experience, and school. (National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1999).
9. Hake, R. R. Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousandstudent survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. Am. J.
Phys. 66, 64–74 (1998).
10. Freeman, S. et al. Active learning increases student performance in science,
engineering, and mathematics. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 111, 8410–8415 (2014).
11. Chi, M. T. & Wylie, R. The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to
active learning outcomes. Educ. Psychol. 49, 219–243 (2014).
12. Handelsman, J. et al. Scientiﬁc teaching. Science 304, 521–522 (2004).
13. Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W. & Gertzog, W. A. Accommodation of a
scientiﬁc conception: Toward a theory of conceptual change. Sci. Educ. 66,
211–227 (1982).
14. Labov, J. B., Reid, A. H. & Yamamoto, K. R. Integrated biology and undergraduate
science education: A new biology education for the twenty-ﬁrst century? CBE-Life
Sci. Educ. 9, 10–16 (2010).
15. Tanner, K. D. Structure matters: Twenty-one teaching strategies to promote
student engagement and cultivate classroom equity. CBE-Life Sci. Educ. 12,
322–331 (2013).
16. Jensen, J. L., Kummer, T. A. & Godoy, P. D. d M. Improvements from a ﬂipped
classroom may simply be the fruits of active learning. CBE Life Sci. Educ 14, 1–12
(2015).
17. Deslauriers, L., Schelew, E. & Wieman, C. Improved learning in a large-enrollment
physics class. Science 332, 862–864 (2011).
18. Wieman, C. Improving How Universities Teach Science: Lessons from the Science
Education Initiative. (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2017).
19. Kapur, M. Productive failure in learning the concept of variance. Instr. Sci. 40,
651–672 (2012).
20. Kapur, M. Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive failure,
and unproductive success in learning. Educ. Psychol. 51, 289–299 (2016).
21. Schwartz, D. L. & Martin, T. Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden
efﬁciency of encouraging original student production in statistics instruction.
Cogn. Instr. 22, 129–184 (2004).
22. Loibl, K., Roll, I. & Rummel, N. Towards a theory of when and how problem
solving followed by instruction supports learning. Educ. Psychol. Rev. 29, 693–715
(2016).
23. Holmes, N. G., Day, J., Park, A. H., Bonn, D. & Roll, I. Making the failure more
productive: Scaffolding the invention process to improve inquiry behaviors and
outcomes in invention activities. Instr. Sci. 42, 523–538 (2014).
24. Alpert, R. & Haber, R. N. Anxiety in academic achievement situations. J. Abnorm.
Social. Psychol. 61, 207 (1960).
25. Covington, M. V. & Omelich, C. L. Need achievement revisited: Veriﬁcation of
Atkinson’s original 2 x 2 model. Stress Emot.: Anxiety, anger, Curiosit. 14, 85–105
(1991).

npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

S.G. Chowrira et al.

8
26. Martin, A. J. & Marsh, H. W. Fear of failure: Friend or foe? Aust. Psychol. 38, 31–38
(2003).
27. Schwartz, D. L., Sears, D. & Chang, J. Reconsidering prior knowledge. In M. C.
Lovett & P. Shah (Eds.), Carnegie Mellon symposia on cognition. Thinking with
data (pp. 319–344). (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, Mahwah, NJ, US,
2007).
28. Bloom, B. S., Engelhart, M. D., Furst, E. J., Hill, W. H. & Krathwohl, D. R. Taxonomy of
Educational Objectives, Handbook I: The Cognitive Domain. Vol. 19 (David McKay
Co Inc, New York, 1956).
29. Oh-McGinnis, T. R., Smith, K., Taylor, J. & Chowrira, S. Transcription and Translation.
(2018).
http://q4b.biology.ubc.ca/concept-inventories/transcription-andtranslation. (Accessed 28 Feb 2018)
30. Adams, W. K. & Wieman, C. E. Development and validation of instruments to
measure learning of expert-like thinking. Int. J. Sci. Educ. 33, 1289–1312 (2011).
31. Hestenes, D., Wells, M. & Swackhamer, G. Force concept inventory. Phys. Teach.
30, 141–158 (1992).
32. Kapur, M. & Bielaczyc, K. Designing for productive failure. J. Learn. Sci. 21, 45–83
(2012).
33. Lai, P. K., Portolese, A. & Jacobson, M. J. Does sequence matter? Productive failure
and designing online authentic learning for process engineering. Br. J. Educ.
Technol. 48, 1217–1227 (2017).
34. Jacobson, M. J. et al. Designs for learning about climate change as a complex
system. Learn. Instr. 52, 1–14 (2017).
35. Pathak, S. A., Kim, B., Jacobson, M. J. & Zhang, B. Learning the physics of electricity: A qualitative analysis of collaborative processes involved in productive
failure. Int. J. Comput.-Support. Collab. Learn. 6, 57–73 (2011).
36. Westermann, K. & Rummel, N. Delaying instruction: Evidence from a study in a
university relearning setting. Instr. Sci. 40, 673–689 (2012).
37. Schwartz, D. L. & Bransford, J. D. A time for telling. Cogn. Instr. 16, 475–5223
(1998).
38. Glogger-Frey, I., Fleischer, C., Grüny, L., Kappich, J. & Renkl, A. Inventing a solution
and studying a worked solution prepare differently for learning from direct
instruction. Learn. Instr. 39, 72–87 (2015).
39. Belenky, D. M. & Nokes-Malach, T. J. Motivation and transfer: The role of masteryapproach goals in preparation for future learning. J. Learn. Sci. 21, 399–432 (2012).
40. Heiner, C. E., Banet, A. I. & Wieman, C. Preparing students for class: How to get 80%
of students reading the textbook before class. Am. J. Phys. 82, 989–996 (2014).
41. Loibl, K. & Rummel, N. The impact of guidance during problem-solving prior to
instruction on students’ inventions and learning outcomes. Instr. Sci. 42, 305–326
(2014).
42. Kapur, M. Productive failure in learning math. Cogn. Sci. 38, 1008–1022 (2014).
43. Kapur, M. & Bielczyz, K. Classroom-based experiments in productive failure. In L.
Carlson, C. Hoelscher & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual

npj Science of Learning (2019) 1

Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2812–2817). (Cognitive Science
Society, Austin, TX, 2011).
44. Roll, I., Aleven, V. & Koedinger, K. Outcomes and mechanisms of transfer in
invention activities. In L. Carlson, C. Hö lscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2824–2829).
(Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX, 2011).
45. Roll, I., Holmes, N. G., Day, J. & Bonn, D. Evaluating metacognitive scaffolding in
guided invention activities. Instr. Sci. 40, 691–710 (2012).
46. Kapur, M. A further study of productive failure in mathematical problem solving:
Unpacking the design components. Instr. Sci. 39, 561–579 (2011).
47. Roll, I., Baker, R. Sd, Aleven, V. & Koedinger, K. R. On the beneﬁts of seeking (and
avoiding) help in online problem-solving environments. J. Learn. Sci. 23, 537–560
(2014).
48. Roll, I. et al. Understanding the impact of guiding inquiry: The relationship
between directive support, student attributes, and transfer of knowledge, attitudes and behaviours in inquiry learning. Instr. Sci. 46, 77–104 (2018).
49. Mathan, S. A. & Koedinger, K. R. Fostering the intelligent novice: Learning from
errors with metacognitive tutoring. Educ. Psychol. 40, 257–265 (2005).
50. Roll, I., Wiese, E. S., Long, Y., Aleven, V. & Koedinger, K. R. Tutoring self- and coregulation with intelligent tutoring systems to help students acquire better
learning skills. Des. Recomm. Intell. Tutor. Syst. 2, 169–182 (2014).
51. DiSessa, A. A. et al. Inventing graphing: Meta-representational expertise in children. J. Math. Behav. 10, 117–160 (1991).
52. Tsui, C.-Y. & Treagust, D. F. Genetics reasoning with multiple external representations. Res. Sci. Educ. 33, 111–135 (2003).
53. Renkl, A. Toward an instructionally oriented theory of example-based learning.
Cogn. Sci. 38, 1–37 (2014).

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2019

Published in partnership with The University of Queensland

