This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

Perspective

A Preliminary Set of Principles to Support Learning in the Context of
Generative AI
Melanie M. Cooper*
Cite This: J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Metrics & More

Article Recommendations

ABSTRACT: Generative AI chatbots are now widely available,
and increasing numbers of students use them. Despite hyperbolic
claims, there is little objective evidence of the efficacy of such
systems for teaching and learning. Early findings suggest that the
use of AI chatbots without guidance or guardrails negatively affects
student learning. Using what evidence we do have together with
our current understanding of how people learn, I lay out a set of
tentative principles for using generative AI to support learning and
instruction Given the overarching assumption that learning requires
ef fort and engagement which can easily be bypassed using AI, I
propose four practical principles to guide faculty as they maneuver
through this new era. (1) Design AI teaching and learning systems to
support self-regulated learning. (2) Develop a course structure and culture that rewards the learning journey. (3) Take advantages of the
affordances of AI to extend what students know and can do. And (4) develop clear and equitable policies for the use of AI. These principles
are predicated on the idea that typical traditional courses (where emphasizing facts and algorithmic problem solving are emphasized)
will become obsolete as these tasks are easily (and perhaps better) carried out by AI bots. It will become increasingly important for
students to understand how they learn, what they can do with their knowledge, and how to solve complex problems that have
societal and economic value.
KEYWORDS: First-Year Undergraduate/General, Curriculum, Generative AI, Learning Theories, Student-Centered Learning

■

INTRODUCTION
Generative AI burst into public consciousness in late 2022, and
since then, its capabilities and ubiquity have advanced rapidly.
Over the past two years, AI has been embedded into many of the
systems we encounter daily. As of June 2025, ChatGPT had over
800 million daily users,1 and it is estimated that “Moore’s Law”
(the doubling time for capability) for GenAI is seven months.2
The use of GenAI for education has been enthusiastically but
asymmetrically adopted, by which I mean the people who are on
the receiving end of education compared to those who aim to
deliver that education. While estimates vary (since these data are
self-reports) it appears that over 85% of students have used
GenAI to complete assignments as part of their formal
education.3 There has been no parallel burst of enthusiasm
from most higher education institutions or instructors. A survey
of faculty indicated that 80% of faculty felt unprepared to use
AI.4
Certainly, there are numerous publications on the use of
GenAI in education authored by early adopters5 (over 5000 and
counting), but many educators are only just beginning to
grapple with the impact and implications of the GenAI
revolution. There are several reasons for this, including the
fact that, for many faculty, the first use of AI they have
© 2025 The Author. Published by
American Chemical Society and Division
of Chemical Education, Inc.

encountered is inappropriate student use on assignments not
designed for AI, and the tendency of systems to hallucinate.
Almost three years into the AI era, most higher education
institutions have failed to provide instructors with the tools
needed to investigate the affordances and drawbacks of this
rapid change. In fact, we do not really know how to use GenAI to
support student learning.4 This lack of evidence has not stopped
numerous commercial entities from making unfounded claims
about how their AI systems improve student learning and make
instructors lives easier by removing “tedious” (or vital and
important, depending on how you look at it) tasks such as
designing instruction and instructional materials and grading
student work. In 2024, there were over 1500 start-up AI learning
systems, funded by over $6.5 billion,6 to say nothing of the
commercial entities already in the field who are embedding AI
into their existing systems. Similarly, the major AI companies are
Received: September 28, 2025
Revised: December 2, 2025
Accepted: December 10, 2025
Published: December 26, 2025

36

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

ACCESS

Read Online

Journal of Chemical Education

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

their own devices and often default to asking chatbots for
answers or asking the bots to complete assignments such as
essays and reports.
There is no doubt about the potential of AI systems to
improve learning outcomes. There are a several studies showing
that use of a purposefully designed tutoring chatbot, one that
provides hints and pointers but does not directly answer
questions, can be more productive than nonpurposefully
designed chatbots or than human tutors or than searching for
answers on the Internet.14,21 The problem appears to be the
unrestrained access to untrained AI chatbots that makes transfer
of information from the bot to the completed task without
passing through the student so easy. If learning were as simple as
being told, every college lecture would be 100% effective, and we
would not need universities (or schools). Here, using the
admittedly limited research and evidence we currently have
about the impact of AI on learning and the far larger research
base for how learning occurs, I aim to provide a preliminary set
of principles for the design of AI learning systems. These
principles are intended for practitioners and researchers alike.
They are undergirded by our current understanding of how
learning occurs and how learning environments can be
structured to support learning. They are not intended to be
all-encompassing and should be expected to evolve in
sophistication and practical value as more evidence is gathered.

■

OVERARCHING PRINCIPLE: LEARNING REQUIRES
EFFORT AND ENGAGEMENT WHICH CAN EASILY
BE BYPASSED USING AI
Although most educators now recognize that “telling is not
teaching”, in STEM disciplines, this has not significantly
impacted the overall approaches to teaching and learning for
many college instructors. The most prevalent approaches to
transforming STEM teaching and learning in higher education
have centered around student engagement strategies22,23 (often
called active learning or evidence based instructional practices),
that have been shown to improve outcomes for some students.23
There is also a smaller but growing literature that shows how
carefully designed curricula and assessments can impact what
students know, what they can do with that knowledge, and how
they structure their disciplinary understanding.24,25 However,
according to a national survey published in 2018 most STEM
instruction is still based primarily on information delivery
through lectures.26
One of the reasons for the low uptake of strategies intended to
improve teaching and learning is almost certainly a lack of
understanding about how people learn: learners must actively
construct both their knowledge and how that knowledge can be
used.27,28 Knowledge is not transmitted intact from instructor to
learner but is reconstructed by the learner as they understand,
connect, and use that knowledge. Thus, in a transmission-based
learning environment (pure lectures), the actual learning
typically takes place outside the class, when students study, do
homework, or otherwise use the knowledge covered in class.
Unfortunately, it is these activities that many students are
replacing with AI support, for example, by asking for homework
answers, brainstorming ideas, or writing essays, rather than
wrestling with the work themselves.
Active learning techniques move the construction process
into an environment where it can be guided by a knowledgeable
instructor. When thoughtfully implemented, this approach has
been found to be particularly helpful for students who have
historically underperformed, but appears to be less important for
37

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

investing heavily in AI for education and providing free access to
studens7,8 to secure a future user-base. The current U.S.
Presidential administration of Donald J. Trump has released an
official proclamation9 calling for increased use of AI in
education.
The claims about the affordances of these commercial systems
are unfounded because we do not have a great deal of careful
research on outcomes (that is, their effects on students). Such
research takes time, resources, and dare I say it−expertise. I
think we can be fairly confident in survey studies that tell us
students “like” GenAI supported learning systems and find them
useful.3 After all, chatbots are specifically designed to be helpful
and accommodating (or depending on how you look at it
ingratiating and obsequious); they can provide individual
tutoring, support, and feedback, and they can take the hard
work out of completing assignments (and for those so inclined,
can actually do all the work), so what’s not to like? However,
there is no robust body of work on the impact of GenAI on
actual learning (rather than on the perception of learning). As
the New York Times wrote, “OpenAI’s push to A.I.-ify college
education amounts to a national experiment on millions of students.
The use of these chatbots in schools is so new that their potential
long-term educational benef its, and possible side effects, are not yet
established.”.10
In fact, the research we do have is not particularly
encouraging. While most of the research on the impact of AI
on learning leans on participant self-reports, few measure
learning in any meaningful way. Those reports that do
investigate aspects of cognition are not so positive. For example
there are a number of studies that appear to show that use of AI
tends to reduce critical thinking, cognitive effort,11−13 and exam
performance.14,15 When students use AI for homework, students
found difficulty with the summative tests when AI was
unavailable.15 This finding correlates with an earlier study16
predating the use of AI, showing the number of students who
benefited from doing homework decreased from 2008 to 2017.
This study timeline corresponds to the rise of widely available
Internet search systems and online “homework assistance”
companies such as Chegg17 or Course Hero.18 The rise of much
more powerful and accessible AI systems will exacerbate this
issue unless we change our approaches to teaching and learning
and how we gather evidence about what students know and can
do.
So, while we do not currently have a huge amount of evidence
about the impact of AI on learning, we can make some
reasonable inferences: (1) judging by the interest from AI
companies and venture capitalists, there is an enormous financial
incentive to embed AI tools into all aspects of learning without
robust evidence, (2) there is a general, nonevidence-based
enthusiasm from some quarters about the impact of AI on
learning, and (3) there is little evidence that unfettered access to
AI actually does improve learning or cognitive (“critical
thinking”) skills.
This does not mean that AI cannot support improving student
engagement, learning outcomes, or course and instructor
effectiveness, but rather, we have not yet figured out how to
use it productively. Many reported uses of AI appear to have the
potential (and are often used) to bypass learning,19 by providing
a low barrier to finding answers that does not engage the
cognitive mechanisms that are required for learning to occur.20
To facilitate actual learning, we need to consider what we already
know about how people learn and build systems that take
advantage of this knowledge. Currently, most students are left to

Perspective

Journal of Chemical Education

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

has been shown to produce similar ideas, presumably because
the AI has been trained on the same materials.36
However, learning is hard, and AI natives (present day middle
and high schoolers and early college students) are inundated
with social media posts that provide approaches to avoiding
detection and in some cases encouraging cheating because
“everyone does it”. It is easy to fall prey to the idea that letting
the AI do the initial hard work of “thinking” will work out well.
How then do we convince students to put in the work upfront
and use AI to build on their own ideas and input, that is, to
become self-regulated learners, rather than taking the easier way
out and accepting the AI at face value? In a study of how students
used AI to address a computational modeling task, Haraldsrud
and Odden37 found that productive interactions with AI
involved students using it as a “distributed cognitive system”,
whereas when students outsourced their thinking to the AI, they
often became overwhelmed and were unable to make sense of
the output.
Designing AI systems that are intended to do more than
provide answers to questions is certainly possible. There are now
commercially designed tutoring systems which are becoming
more available, and the big three AI companies (Open AI,7
Google Gemini,8 Claude Anthropic38) have released education
versions of their systems for both students and instructors.
ChatGPT, Claude, and Gemini all allow students to turn on
“study mode” which will not provide answers but will prompt
and lead students to appropriate answers. However, it is not at all
clear how these systems are designed (what learning theories
guide the bots design), nor do you know what information the
system is calling upon to respond to the student query. Currently
there is little research about what level of frustration students are
willing to bear, nor how to stop them accessing a more
accommodating bot that is friendly, engaging, and confident in
their responses, but not necessarily correct, since GenAI systems
can hallucinate and make up references. For a novice learner
who almost certainly does not know enough, or has the
experience-based confidence, to critique a chatbot output,
passive acceptance of a ChatBot’s response can be seductive and
seem completely reasonable. In addition, they can provide
answers that are too complex, or too simple, or just biased: see
MechaHitler,39 and may not emphasize or even address the
intentions of the instructor, or engage the learner in reflection.
To address these problems, course-based Chatbot tutors
using course materials and prompts engineered to the
instructors’ specifications are relatively easy to develop. It is
possible to load information (for example course materials) into
the AI system, which can be used as sources of support and help
for students. For example, instructors who are interested in
helping students construct a causal mechanistic explanation for a
phenomenon can load the module with examples and course
materials that support students in this endeavor. There are also a
number of resources available to help construct useful
prompts.7,8 Examples include: a bot that provides hints and
questions can engage a student in a reflective or Socratic
conversation through which the student eventually arrives at an
appropriate response, or a prompt that instructs the bot to be the
learner, where the student teaches the bot. Even though this is
our best theoretical approach, we still have little evidence about
how students might interact with such a Socratic tutor “in the
wild”. For example, a general chemistry study using a “thinkpair-chatbot-share (TPCS)” approach showed promising
results, compared to students engaging in think-pair-share
(TPS), without support from a bot. However, participation was

Principle 1: Design (or Use) AI Learning Systems That
Support Self-Regulated Learning

Successful learners are often characterized as self-regulated
learners: they plan, monitor and evaluate their learning and
learning strategies.32−35 However, students who use chatbots to
provide whole cloth answers bypass any self-regulation or
metacognitive strategies while offloading the business of
knowledge construction and are, therefore, less likely to learn
much. Since beginning learners are typically not in a position to
evaluate responses, it is tempting for them to accept direct
answers and move on without reflection. So it is not surprising
that unsupervised chatbot use leads to a host of learning
problems, including lack of retention of knowledge, less
ownership of products produced, reductions in critical thinking
and lower grades.11−13,36
Therefore, it is important to help students understand that
while chatbots are readily available sources of information and
homework answers, it is more effective to engage with the
chatbot in a way that promotes an interactive and reflective
partnership. However, a recent report from OpenAI “Building
an AI-Ready Workforce” shows that the most common use of
ChatGPT by college students is “Starting papers/projects”. That
is, students most commonly begin their work on the chatbot,
rather than making an initial effort and using the chatbot to
refine, fill in gaps, or critique. The second most common use of
ChatGPT was to “summarize texts”, and the third was
“brainstorming”. All three (and many more user cases) imply
that students are using GenAI in ways that circumvent rather
than support learning. It is not surprising that transcribing (or
copy-pasting) answers with minimal “edits”, leads to few
memories of what was contained in the answer. We should
not be surprised when the evidence tells us that using AI as the
first step in any learning activity leads to less cognitive
engagement, less recall of content, and lower abilities in
summative assessments. Additionally brainstorming with AI
38

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

those students who know how to actively engage without extra
support.23 This latter group includes future college instructors
and students whose background has provided them with the
expertise and information to navigate the “hidden curriculum”.29
That is, college instructors typically were able to teach
themselves, because of their background, intrinsic interest,
motivation, and abilities. All of this may lead to a
misunderstanding on the part of those same college instructors
about why students are not learning from their excellent lectures.
Furthermore, as learners construct their knowledge base,
many researchers believe that multiple cognitive and epistemic
resources30,31 must be actively connected and integrated before
students can develop a robust and useful cognitive framework.
Unfortunately, there is no shortcut for the hard work of making
sense of the world by productively connecting ideas, However,
the use of AI chatbots is seductive; they are purposefully
engineered to flatter and encourage interaction, and using them
to support learning can be counterproductive as discussed
earlier. Below I offer principles that align with what we know
about learning intended to help instructors guide their students’
use of AI such that learning is accomplished. These principles are
intended to support learning both disciplinary ideas and
productive approaches to using those ideas; the intended
audience is instructors, curriculum developers, and researchers
who are interested in guiding students to use AI productively.
They are not intended for the very different purpose of learning
how to use AI systems for job and career preparation.

Perspective

Journal of Chemical Education

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

significantly lower in the TPCS condition.40 While it is much
easier, and perhaps more initially satisfying to simply receive full
feedback giving the correct information, evidence suggests that
students often do not use feedback to improve.41,42

Perspective

Principle 2: Develop a Course Structure and Culture That
Rewards the Journey (To Knowledge) Rather than the
Correct Answer to Relatively Trivial Tasks

Many students see the work assigned to them as ″spending
time”, and frankly in many cases, they are correct. For example, a
lecture course where homework is assigned using a randomized
multiple choice LMS, but is never mentioned again, might easily
give students the impression that the homework is not actually
necessary. In addition, AI systems excel at responding to such
formulaic questions as well as to traditional tasks such as writing
essays. We need to help students understand that the process of
learning is important and design learning environments where
moving straight to the product or answer is not the goal. That is,
the reward is in the process of learning, not achieving the correct
answer on a randomized multiple-choice test. This could take
several forms, for example, by developing a course where both
the act of learning and the result of learning are rewarded, or we
can design activities that require evidence that the student
initiated the first response to the task and followed up with how
the student responded to feedback. For example, it is now
possible not only to provide individual feedback to students
using AI systems, but also to summarize the whole class
responses for the instructor, who can then use that feedback to
tailor their instruction.43,44 Other promising approaches in
chemistry provide strategies for how instructors can adapt their
courses to AI use, framing AI, modeling its use, providing AI
compatible resources, and encouraging reflection and metacognition.45,46
An example of the possibilities for enhancing the focus on
formative assessments is the curriculum “Chemistry, Life, the
Universe and Everything, (CLUE)” which is specifically
designed to engage students to use their knowledge of chemistry
core ideas to construct scientifically plausible models,
explanations, and arguments.47 Students practice these activities
in both homework and group recitation sessions in which they
are given credit for “good faith effort” rather than the correct
response. They are encouraged to experiment, grapple with new
ideas, and identify areas of confusion. Each of these activities can
provide evidence of student activity, especially when delivered in
a system that can capture student work in real time, such as
beSocratic48 (an online formative assessment system that allows
open ended, written, and drawn responses). The value of these
formative assessment activities is shown by the fact that they
contribute around 30−40% of the course grade, while course
exams contribute around 60−65%. For those who may worry
that the “rigor” of the course will be diminished by emphasizing
formative tasks that focus on the process of learning, where
students are rewarded for effort rather than correctness, the most
pertinent evidence here is that this approach does not diminish
the achievements of CLUE students. Even though more
students pass the course when compared with students in a
traditional course they score above average on an ACS
conceptual general chemistry exam,24 and those students who
move on to organic chemistry do just as well as other students
from more selective courses (such as honors, majors, or selfselected learning communities).49,50 That is, students appear to
benefit greatly from learning in such an environment and are
more likely to pass the course and succeed in the next courses

Principle 3: Use AI as a Partner to Extend What Students
Know and Can Do (Rather than to Reinforce Memorization
and Algorithmic Problem Solving)

The availability of AI, which potentially has all the information
available on the Internet, makes traditional assessment tasks
(that emphasize memorization, rather than use of knowledge51)
obsolete. This is not to say that there will be no need to learn
facts and skills but rather that we can use the affordances of AI to
go beyond these basics and learn them in the context of solving
complex problems and designing solutions. Furthermore, this
gives us an opportunity to consider what it is that we really want
students to know and do by the end of the course. For example,
instead of focusing on 263 content details described in the ACS
General Chemistry Anchoring Concepts Map,52 the advent of
AI could allow us to expand what we expect from students. If we
focus on supporting students as they engage in scientific and
engineering practices,53 or systems thinking,54 while using the
content that they are learning from the AI system, we can not
only develop more engaging tasks, but also provide better
evidence about what students can do with their knowledge.
Part of addressing more complex problems is the act of
brainstorming, that is, devising creative and innovative ideas for
further exploration, and once again, students commonly believe
that AI is beneficial for brainstorming.55 Initial evidence
appeared to show that ideas generated by people using AI
systems were in fact more creative than any one person without
the aid of AI.56 However, a subsequent study showed when the
ideas from groups of people are combined the overall set of ideas
is more creative and more diverse than for groups using AI.36 As
the authors note “reliance on ChatGPT for idea generation
comes with a trade-off: while enhancing the creativity of
individuals, it reduces the diversity of ideas in a pool of ideas, a
critical element for effective brainstorming.” It is not surprising
that individuals using the same AI bots for brainstorming will
produce highly similar sets of ideas. That being said, it has been
shown that teams of people working with AI as a partner (rather
than an initiator or deliverer of information) were more
productive and innovative than teams working alone, or
individuals working with AI.57 Therefore, it seems likely that
using AI as a partner for teams of students acting as a resource as
they design solutions to problems shows great potential.
Similarly it is highly likely that AI can be used to support
learning environments that are based on Explore−Invent−
Apply learning approaches, such as POGIL.58
39

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

than students who were taught in a more traditional way that
emphasized scores on summative assessments and correct
answers to multiple choice homework problems.
Moving a significant proportion of the course expectations
and grading to formative tasks, which can be designed to require
student initial input, rather than relying solely on summative
assessments and randomized homework systems (that can be
answered by AI) is one approach to changing the learning
environment that improves student outcomes and changes how
students, instructors, and course designers think about learning.
Using these student responses to drive learning in the next class
can make the completion of these tasks more relevant and allow
students to see where they fit in the learning process. However,
the role of the summative exam should not be minimized at
present. There must be a reliable way to determine what
students have learned, but by emphasizing formative assessments as well, we can help students along that path to learning.

Journal of Chemical Education

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

Perspective

■

CONCLUSIONS
This paper is intended to provide guidance for instructors,
researchers, and curriculum developers about how to incorporate artificial intelligence teaching and learning strategies into
their practice. I propose that we do need to consider changes in
the design of learning environments, how we teach, and what we
expect students to know and to do. Recognizing that students
must actively engage in their learning is crucial; learning
something new is difficult, and while AI may provide ways to
support students through that difficulty, it cannot replace
student engagement. Therefore, we need to ensure that (1)
students are supported in their learning by encouraging
interaction, reflection, and construction of new ideas and skills;
(2) we recognize the journey to learning not just the end point,
by providing scaffolding and formative tasks that are recognized
and rewarded in the overall course structure; (3) we use AI to
extend what has been possible, particularly in large enrollment
courses, rather than emphasize the rote and skills based
competencies that are often the end point of such courses;
and (4) we ensure that we treat students fairly and equitably with
regard to AI access.
Business as usual will result in a generation of students who
are unlikely to develop the cognitive skills that will be required in
the future. If that were not enough, consider the fate of
instructors who do not adapt, who continue to emphasize facts
and skills that can be developed by AI tutoring systems rather
than reconsidering what it is that is important for students to
know and do. Their fate (at best) will be that of what has come to
be known as the reverse centaur,67 that is “someone who is
harnessed to the machine, reduced to a mere peripheral for a
cruelly tireless robotic overlord that directs you to do the work
that it can’t”.67 While this may seem dramatic, it may well be that
failing to adapt will lead to a new class of instructor. One who is
perhaps in charge of thousands of students, who are interacting
with bots and who are assessed by bots. The instructor will be
there to ensure that the bots are functioning and to adjudicate
errors. This is clearly the vision of some tech leaders who have a
strong financial stake in that future. To avoid this, we need to act
now, to determine how AI can help students learn, not just in the
old ways, but to prepare them for the future. It is time to
seriously reconsider what is important for students to know and
do, and what does it mean to learn in the age of AI. Personally, I
would rather be the centaur “someone whose work is
supercharged by automation: you are a human head atop the
tireless body of a machine that lets you get more done than you
could ever do on your own.” Now is the time to take control of
the reins, to redesign learning systems that can take advantage of
the affordances of AI, without outsourcing the creative and
rewarding parts of teaching and learning.

Principle 4: AI Use Should Be Equitable and Clearly
Delineated

While many students report using AI in their educational
endeavors, in fact there is a significant group of students who do
not.65 There are several reasons for this, including the
recognition that offloading cognition is not conducive to
learning, concerns about appropriate use, lack of access to AI
systems, and lack of knowledge. Because most instructors and
institutions are still in a state of flux, the rules of engagement
with AI have often not been made clear to students. Couple this
with genuine confusion about what constitutes cheating, and we
have a situation that is both unfair and inequitable. There will
always be some students who use AI to complete assignments,
even if an instructor has decided that absolutely no use of AI is
permissible. In such a situation, AI use may allow students to
complete work (often without learning much as discussed
earlier) and be given a good grade, while at the same time a
student who completes assignments in good faith may make
errors and receive a lower grade. To address this unfairness, if no
AI is allowed, then no work outside of class time should be
counted as part of a grade. Only summative in-person
examinations or tasks, where there is no access to AI, should
be acceptable in this situation; admission tests (MCAT, LSAT)
and certification exams are run in this way.
Certainly, retreating to the precomputer age is one approach
to handling the impact of AI, and it would ensure fairness of a
sort since no-one could use outside help. However, there is an
argument that ignoring technologies such as chatbots is shortsighted, since we are not able to put the genie back in the bottle.
Additionally, there is ample evidence that relying solely on
summative assessments tends to favor particular groups of
students. It has been shown that grades in a typical general
chemistry course, where numerical problem solving and rote
skills are emphasized, are highly correlated with math
preparation.66 In contrast, courses that focus on the use of
scientific practices, with opportunities to engage in formative
tasks, are less likely to show such correlations−that is they are
more equitable.24
The alternative is to take advantage of the advantages of AI as
outlined in these principles. Students deserve to know how and
why they should use AI to support learning, and they should also
have access to such systems and be taught how to use them
effectively.

■

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

Melanie M. Cooper − Chemistry Department, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48224, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-7050-8649; Email: mmc@msu.edu
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
Notes

The author declares no competing financial interest.
40

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

This kind of problem59 or project based60 learning has a long
and storied history most often in precollege or medical school
environments, but in chemistry education this approach has not
been widely adopted outside of laboratories,61,62 perhaps
because of the difficulty of enacting it with large classes.
However, it now seems entirely possible that by using AI as a
learning partner students can be asked to engage with far more
complex problems than are typical at present, by asking students
to explore relevant phenomena that involve not only understanding and using the underlying chemistry, but also real-world
constraints such as broader ecological, societal, and political
systems.63 For example, the problem of polyfluorinated alkyl
substances (PFAS) in the environment, can serve as the basis for
learning a wide range of chemistry principles (intermolecular
forces, bond energies, solubility, reactivity) while at the same
time engaging students in designing and evaluations solutions to
problems.64 At the same time, AI bots can help the instructor
design and align such instructional tasks with appropriate
prompting.43

Journal of Chemical Education

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

■

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge my AI discussion group, Mike
Klymkowsky, Chris Shaltry, John Zubeck, and Jon Stolzus, for
stimulating and helpful discussions. This work is supported by
the National Science Foundation under NSF-DUE 2415032.
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the view of the National Science Foundation.

■

Perspective

REFERENCES

(1) Singh, S. ChatGPT Users Stats (December 2025) − Growth & Usage
Data; DemandSage, 2025; https://www.demandsage.com/chatgptstatistics/ (accessed 2025-06-08).
(2) A New Moore’s Law for AI Agents.. AI Digest; Sage, 2025; https://
theaidigest.org/time-horizons (accessed 2025-06-08).
(3) Freeman, J. Student Generative AI Survey 2025.; HEPI, 2025;
https://www.hepi.ac.uk/2025/02/26/student-generative-ai-survey2025/ (accessed 2025-06-08).
(4) McMurtrie, B. AI Has Joined the Faculty. The Chronicle of Higher
Education 2025; https://www.chronicle.com/article/ai-has-joined-thefaculty (accessed 2025-11-25).
(5) Rogers, E. M. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed.; Free Press: New
York, 2003.
(6) List of Funded Education Startups For 2025; Growth List, 2023;
https://growthlist.co/education-startups/ (accessed 2025-09-20).
(7) Introducing ChatGPT Edu; OpenAI, 2024; https://openai.com/
index/introducing-chatgpt-edu/ (accessed 2024-06-14).
(8) Empower Learning with Gemini for Education. Google for
Education, 2025; https://edu.google.com/intl/ALL_us/ai/geminifor-education/ (accessed 2025-07-10).
(9) Orders, E. Advancing Artificial Intelligence Education for American
Youth; The White House, 2025; https://www.whitehouse.gov/
presidential-actions/2025/04/advancing-artificial-intelligenceeducation-for-american-youth/ (accessed 2025-07-15).
(10) Singer, N. S. Welcome to Campus. Here’s Your ChatGPT; New
York Times. June 7, 2025. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/07/
technology/chatgpt-openai-colleges.html (accessed 2025-06-09).
(11) Kosmyna, N.; Hauptmann, E.; Yuan, Y. T.; Situ, J.; Liao, X.-H.;
Beresnitzky, A. V.; Braunstein, I.; Maes, P. Your Brain on ChatGPT:
Accumulation of Cognitive Debt When Using an AI Assistant for Essay
Writing Task. arXiv 2025; arXiv:2506.08872.
(12) Gerlich, M. AI Tools in Society: Impacts on Cognitive Offloading
and the Future of Critical Thinking. Societies 2025, 15 (1), 6.
(13) Lee, H. P. H.; Sarkar, A.; Tankelevich, L.; Drosos, I.; Rintel, S.;
Banks, R.; Wilson, N. The Impact of Generative AI on Critical
Thinking: Self-Reported Reductions in Cognitive Effort and Confidence Effects From a Survey of Knowledge Workers. In CHI '25:
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems; ACM, 2025; 1121.
(14) Bastani, H.; Bastani, O.; Sungu, A.; Ge, H.; Kabakcı, O.;
Mariman, R. Generative AI Without Guardrails Can Harm Learning:
Evidence from High School Mathematics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2025, 122, e2422633122.
(15) Wecks, J. O.; Voshaar, J.; Plate, B. J.; Zimmermann, J. Generative
AI Usage and Exam Performance. SSRN Journal 2024.
(16) Glass, A. L.; Kang, M. Fewer Students Are Benefiting from Doing
Their Homework: An Eleven-Year Study. Educational Psychology 2022,
42, 185.
(17) Get 24/7 Homework Help, Rent Textbooks; Chegg,2025; https://
www.chegg.com/ (accessed 2025-07-14).
(18) Course Hero Plans; Course Hero, 2025; http://www.coursehero.
com/plans/ (accessed 2025-07-14).
(19) O’Connell, D. How Are Students Really Using AI?. The Chronicle
of Higher Education 2025; https://www.chronicle.com/article/howare-students-really-using-ai (accessed 2025-07-16).
(20) Chatterji, A.; Cunningham, T.; Deming, D. J.; Hitzig, Z.; Ong, C.;
Shan, C. Y.; Wadman, K. How People Use ChatGPT; National Bureau of
Economic Research, 2025; w34255. DOI: 10.3386/w34255.
41

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

(21) Kestin, G.; Miller, K.; Klales, A.; Milbourne, T.; Ponti, G. AI
Tutoring Outperforms In-Class Active Learning: An RCT Introducing
a Novel Research-Based Design in an Authentic Educational Setting.
Sci. Rep 2025, 15 (1), 17458.
(22) Lombardi, D.; Shipley, T. F.; Bailey, J. M.; Bretones, P. S.;
Prather, E. E.; Ballen, C. J.; Knight, J. K.; Smith, M. K.; Stowe, R. L.;
Cooper, M. M.; Prince, M.; Atit, K.; Uttal, D. H.; LaDue, N. D.;
McNeal, P. M.; Ryker, K.; St John, K.; van der Hoeven Kraft, K. J.;
Docktor, J. L. The Curious Construct of Active Learning. Psychol Sci.
Public Interest 2021, 22, 8−43.
(23) Freeman, S.; Eddy, S. L.; McDonough, M.; Smith, M. K.;
Okoroafor, N.; Jordt, H.; Wenderoth, M. P. Active Learning Increases
Student Performance in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014, 111, 8410−8415.
(24) Matz, R. L.; Fata-Hartley, C. L.; Posey, L. A.; Laverty, J. T.;
Underwood, S. M.; Carmel, J. H.; Herrington, D. G.; Stowe, R. L.;
Caballero, M. D.; Ebert-May, D.; Cooper, M. M. Evaluating the Extent
of a Large-Scale Transformation in Gateway Science Courses. Science
Advances 2018, 4 (10), No. eaau0554.
(25) Underwood, S. M.; Kararo, A. T.; Posey, L. A.; Pollock, A. M.;
Herrington, D. G.; Stowe, R. L.; Carmel, J. H.; Klymkowsky, M. W.;
Cooper, M. M. Components Critical to Successful Adoption and
Adaptation of CLUE, a Transformed General Chemistry Curriculum. J.
Chem. Educ. 2023, 100 (9), 3374−3385.
(26) Stains, M.; Harshman, J.; Barker, M. K.; Chasteen, S. V.; Cole, R.
S.; DeChenne-Peters, S. E.; Eagan, M. K.; Esson, J. M.; Knight, J. K.;
Laski, F. A.; Levis-Fitzgerald, M.; Lee, C. J.; Lo, S. M.; McDonnell, L.
M.; McKay, T. A.; Michelotti, N.; Musgrove, A.; Palmer, M. S.; Plank,
K. M.; Rodela, T. M.; Sanders, E. R.; Schimpf, N. G.; Schulte, P. M.;
Smith, M. K.; Stetzer, M.; Van Valkenburgh, B.; Vinson, E.; Weir, L. K.;
Wendel, P. J.; Wheeler, L. B.; Young, A. M. Anatomy of STEM
Teaching in North American Universities. Science 2018, 359 (6383),
1468−1470.
(27) Bodner, G. M. Constructivism: A Theory of Knowledge. J. Chem.
Educ. 1986, 63, 873−878.
(28) Schwartz, D. L.; Lindgren, R.; Lewis, S. Constructivism in an Age
of Non-Constructivist Assessments. In Constructivist Instruction: Success
or Failure?; Tobias, S., Duffy, T. M., Eds.; Routledge/Taylor & Francis
Group: New York, 2009; pp 34−61.
(29) Jackson, P. W. Life in Classrooms; Teachers College Press, 1990.
(30) Hammer, D. Student Resources for Learning Introductory
Physics. Am. J. Phys. 2000, 68, S52−S59.
(31) Elby, A.; Hammer, D. Epistemological Resources and Framing: A
Cognitive Framework for Helping Teachers Interpret and Respond to
Their Students’ Epistemologies. Personal epistemology in the classroom:
Theory, research, and implications for practice 2010, 4 (1), 409−434.
(32) Panadero, E. A Review of Self-Regulated Learning: Six Models
and Four Directions for Research. Frontiers in psychology 2017, 8, 422.
(33) Zimmerman, B. J. Self-regulated learning and academic
achievement. Educational Psychologist 1990, 25, 3−17.
(34) Cook, E.; Kennedy, E.; McGuire, S. Y. Effect of Teaching
Metacognitive Learning Strategies on Performance in General
Chemistry Courses. J. Chem. Educ. 2013, 90 (8), 961−967.
(35) Sandi-Urena, S.; Cooper, M. M.; Stevens, R. Effect of
Cooperative Problem-Based Lab Instruction on Metacognition and
Problem-Solving Skills. J. Chem. Educ. 2012, 89 (6), 700−706.
(36) Meincke, L.; Nave, G.; Terwiesch, C. ChatGPT Decreases Idea
Diversity in Brainstorming. Nat. Hum Behav 2025, 9 (6), 1107−1109.
(37) Haraldsrud, A.; Odden, T. O. B. Bridging Artificial Intelligence
and Real Intelligence: Self-Scaffolding Computational Modeling with
Generative AI in Chemistry. J. Chem. Educ. 2025, 102 (10), 4255−
4266.
(38) Anthropic Education Report: How University Students Use Claude;
Anthropic PBC, 2025; https://www.anthropic.com/news/anthropiceducation-report-how-university-students-use-claude (accessed 202504-09).
(39) Hagen, L.; Huo, J.; Nguyen, A. Elon Musk’s AI Chatbot, Grok,
Started Calling Itself “MechaHitler” NPR. July 9, 2025; https://www.

Journal of Chemical Education

pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc

Perspective

42

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.5c01413
J. Chem. Educ. 2026, 103, 36−42

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jceda8/​article-pdf/​103/​1/​36/​63148284/​ed5c01413.​pdf by PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV user on 03 September 2026

(61) Budner, D.; Simpson, B. Project-Based Integrated Lecture and
Laboratory Quantitative Analysis Course. J. Chem. Educ. 2018, 95 (9),
1533−1540.
(62) Zhang, M.; Day, E. L.; McFall-Boegeman, H.; Petritis, S. J.;
Cooper, M. M. Incorporation of Green Chemistry into Undergraduate
Organic Laboratory Using Cooperative Project-Based Experiments and
Case Studies. Green Chemistry Letters and Reviews 2023, 16 (1),
2183781.
(63) Day, E. L.; Petritis, S. J.; McFall-Boegeman, H.; Starkie, J.; Zhang,
M.; Cooper, M. M. A Framework for the Integration of Green and
Sustainable Chemistry into the Undergraduate Curriculum: Greening
Our Practice with Scientific and Engineering Practices. J. Chem. Educ.
2024, 101 (5), 1847−1857.
(64) McFall-Boegeman, H.; Petritis, S. J.; Starkie, J.; Schwarz, C. E.;
Zhang, M.; Cooper, M. M.; Day, E. L. Unpacking Engineering Practices
for Curricular Assessment: Aligning Lab Practices and Assessment
Items Using the 3D-LAP. J. Chem. Educ. 2025, 102, 3306.
(65) McMurtrie, B. These Students Use AI a Lot�But Not to Cheat;
Chronicle of Higher Education; 2025; https://www.chronicle.com/
special-projects/the-different-voices-of-student-success/ai-to-therescue (accessed 2025-07-17).
(66) Ralph, V. R.; Scharlott, L. J.; Schafer, A. G. L.; Deshaye, M. Y.;
Becker, N. M.; Stowe, R. L. Advancing Equity in STEM: The Impact
Assessment Design Has on Who Succeeds in Undergraduate
Introductory Chemistry. JACS Au 2022, 2, 1869.
(67) Doctorow, C. The Reverse-Centaur Apocalypse Is upon Us;
Medium, 2024; https://doctorow.medium.com/https-pluralistic-net2024-08-02-despotism-on-demand-virtual-whips-4919c7e3d2bc (accessed 2025-07-27).

npr.org/2025/07/09/nx-s1-5462609/grok-elon-musk-antisemiticracist-content (accessed 2025-07-19).
(40) Naeyaert, P. J. P.; Scarratt, L. R. J.; Murphy, T.; Pullen, R. ThinkPair-Chatbot-Share: AI-Facilitated Peer Learning in Chemistry. J.
Chem. Educ. 2025, 102 (9), 3936−3944.
(41) Adcroft, A. The Mythology of Feedback. Higher Education
Research & Development 2011, 30 (4), 405−419.
(42) Nicol, D. J.; Macfarlane-Dick, D. Formative Assessment and Selfregulated Learning: A Model and Seven Principles of Good Feedback
Practice. Studies in Higher Education 2006, 31 (2), 199−218.
(43) Cooper, M. M.; Klymkowsky, M. W. Let Us Not Squander the
Affordances of LLMs for the Sake of Expedience: Using Retrieval
Augmented Generative AI Chatbots to Support and Evaluate Student
Reasoning. J. Chem. Educ. 2024, 101, 4847.
(44) Klymkowsky, M.; Cooper, M. M. The End of Multiple Choice
Tests: Using AI to Enhance Assessment arXiv2024; arXiv:2406.07481.
(45) Clark, T. M.; Tafini, N. Design and Implementation of a General
Chemistry Course That Promotes AI Use. J. Chem. Educ. 2025, 102 (9),
4017−4023.
(46) Vincent, M. A.; Lear, B. J. Using Exam Preparation and Reflection
to Introduce Artificial Intelligence Tools in Honors General Chemistry.
J. Chem. Educ. 2025, 102 (10), 4470−4478.
(47) Cooper, M. M.; Klymkowsky, M. W. Chemistry, Life, the
Universe and Everything: A New Approach to General Chemistry, and
a Model for Curriculum Reform. J. Chem. Educ. 2013, 90, 1116−1122.
(48) beSocratic; beSocratic, 2024; https://besocratic.com (accessed
2024-08-25).
(49) Crandell, O. M.; Lockhart, M. A.; Cooper, M. M. Arrows on the
Page Are Not a Good Gauge: Evidence for the Importance of Causal
Mechanistic Explanations about Nucleophilic Substitution in Organic
Chemistry. J. Chem. Educ. 2020, 97 (2), 313−327.
(50) Crandell, O. M.; Kouyoumdjian, H.; Underwood, S. M.; Cooper,
M. M. Reasoning about Reactions in Organic Chemistry: Starting It in
General Chemistry. J. Chem. Educ. 2019, 96 (2), 213−226.
(51) Bowen, R. S.; Flaherty, A. A.; Cooper, M. M. Investigating
Student Perceptions of Transformational Intent and Classroom
Culture in Organic Chemistry Courses. Chemistry Education Research
and Practice 2022, 23 (3), 560−581.
(52) Holme, T.; Luxford, C.; Murphy, K. Updating the General
Chemistry Anchoring Concepts Content Map. J. Chem. Educ. 2015, 92
(6), 1115−1116.
(53) A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas. National Research Council; National
Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2012.
(54) Orgill, M.; York, S.; MacKellar, J. Introduction to Systems
Thinking for the Chemistry Education Community. J. Chem. Educ.
2019, 96, 2720.
(55) Marrone, R.; Taddeo, V.; Hill, G. Creativity and Artificial
Intelligence�A Student Perspective. Journal of Intelligence 2022, 10
(3), 65.
(56) Lee, B. C.; Chung, J. An Empirical Investigation of the Impact of
ChatGPT on Creativity. Nat. Hum Behav 2024, 8 (10), 1906−1914.
(57) Dell’Acqua, F.; Ayoubi, C.; Lifshitz-Assaf, H.; Sadun, R.; Mollick,
E. R.; Mollick, L.; Han, Y.; Goldman, J.; Nair, H.; Taub, S.; Lakhani, K.
R. The Cybernetic Teammate: A Field Experiment on Generative AI
Reshaping Teamwork and Expertise. Social Science Research Network:
Rochester, NY 2025..
(58) Moog, R. S.; Spencer, J. N. POGIL: An Overview. In Process
Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL); ACS Symposium Series;
American Chemical Society, 2008; Vol. 994, pp 1−13.
(59) Hung, W.; Jonassen, D. H.; Liu, R. Problem-Based Learning. In
Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology;
Routledge, 2008.
(60) Krajcik, J. S.; Blumenfeld, P. C. Project-Based Learning. In The
Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences; Sawyer, R. K., Ed.;
Cambridge Handbooks in Psychology; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, 2005; pp 317−334.

