Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469
DOI 10.1007/s40593-014-0029-5
R E S E A R C H A RT I C L E

AutoTutor and Family: A Review of 17 Years of Natural
Language Tutoring
Benjamin D. Nye & Arthur C. Graesser & Xiangen Hu

Published online: 30 September 2014
# International Artificial Intelligence in Education Society 2014

Abstract AutoTutor is a natural language tutoring system that has produced learning
gains across multiple domains (e.g., computer literacy, physics, critical thinking). In
this paper, we review the development, key research findings, and systems that have
evolved from AutoTutor. First, the rationale for developing AutoTutor is outlined and
the advantages of natural language tutoring are presented. Next, we review three central
themes in AutoTutor’s development: human-inspired tutoring strategies, pedagogical
agents, and technologies that support natural-language tutoring. Research on early
versions of AutoTutor documented the impact on deep learning by co-constructed
explanations, feedback, conversational scaffolding, and subject matter content. Systems
that evolved from AutoTutor added additional components that have been evaluated
with respect to learning and motivation. The latter findings include the effectiveness of
deep reasoning questions for tutoring multiple domains, of adapting to the affect of
low-knowledge learners, of content over surface features such as voices and persona of
animated agents, and of alternative tutoring strategies such as collaborative lecturing
and vicarious tutoring demonstrations. The paper also considers advances in pedagogical agent roles (such as trialogs) and in tutoring technologies, such semantic processing
and tutoring delivery platforms. This paper summarizes and integrates significant
findings produced by studies using AutoTutor and related systems.
Keywords AutoTutor . Intelligent tutoring systems . Natural language processing .
Discourse processes . Pedagogical agents . Computer-assisted learning

Introduction
One grand challenge for education is to scale up the benefits of expert human tutoring
for millions of students individually (Bloom 1984). Computer-assisted learning has
long been considered as a solution to this challenge, where an automated tutor
B. D. Nye (*) : A. C. Graesser : X. Hu
Institute of Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis, 410 Fedex Institute of Technology, Memphis, TN
38152-3230, USA
e-mail: benjamin.nye@gmail.com

428

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

simulates the pedagogies and conversational patterns of experts. This problem conceptually has a straightforward solution: create a tutoring agent with artificial intelligence
that talks with a student, offering the same guidance and support provided by an expert
human tutor. Work as early as Carbonell (1970) tried this approach by designing the
SCHOLAR tutor to provide Socratic tutoring to learners using natural language text
input and output. Despite promising initial results, natural language conversation turned
out to be a second grand challenge problem for the AI community. The Turing test,
where a computer converses naturally enough to be mistaken for a human, remains a
serious challenge in computer science today (Epstein et al. 2009). Decades after the first
natural language tutoring system, the vision of a computer tutor emulating all of the
capabilities of a human tutor remains a distant goal. However, the good news is that
many capabilities of both human tutors and idealized (e.g., theory-based) tutoring
strategies can be automated in natural language. Attempts to do this have been pursued
by developers of AutoTutor and some of the systems that have evolved after
AutoTutor’s inception in 1997.
Judicious decisions needed to be made about when to imitate human tutors and
when to implement idealized tutoring strategies that a human could not easily implement (Graesser 2011; Graesser et al. 2009). AutoTutor incorporates strategies of human
tutors that were identified in human tutoring protocols (Graesser et al. 2009, 1995), as
well as ideal strategies derived from fundamental learning research (e.g., modelingscaffolding-fading, learning progressions), with the basic research goal of determining
which of the features help learning and student motivation (Graesser 2011; Graesser
et al. 2012a, b). Overall, AutoTutor has been very effective as a learning technology.
AutoTutor has produced learning gains that are on average about 0.8σ (standard
deviation units) above controls who read static instructional materials (e.g., textbooks)
for an equivalent amount of time (Graesser 2011; Graesser et al. 2012b). Learning gains
are on par with expert human tutors in computer mediated conversation. On a “bystander Turing test,” AutoTutor was indistinguishable from a human tutor when
individual conversational turns were evaluated by third-person bystanders who examined transcripts of human-tutor interactions (Person et al. 2002).
This paper tracks three research areas that are central to AutoTutor: human-inspired
tutoring strategies, pedagogical agents, and technology that supports natural language
tutoring. Some recent papers (e.g., Graesser 2011; Graesser et al. 2012b) have summarized some of the AutoTutor research for less technical audiences, whereas this
review offers a broader and more technical perspective on the evolution of each line of
research. A major goal of this review is to help the reader understand the similarities,
contrasts, and contributions of the systems in the AutoTutor family.
Figure 1 displays a timeline of projects that will be described in this paper, loosely
arranged by three foundational lines of research at the top of the diagram. The timeline
is organized according to the date that each project was first published. Each of these
projects was developed by researchers affiliated with the Institute of Intelligent Systems
at University of Memphis, where AutoTutor was developed. Many of these projects
were led by different research collaborations, some of which spread across multiple
institutions, and represent novel contributions in their own right. Although few of the
systems share specific software components or code with AutoTutor, they each inherit
theoretical principles, features of AutoTutor’s design (e.g., expectation-misconception
tailored dialog, which will be described later), natural-language processing algorithms,

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

429

Fig. 1 Timeline for AutoTutor Family of Projects

and conversational agents. In this sense, these systems form a “family” of related
systems that has evolved over time. Due to space limitations, acronyms are used in
Fig. 1. Appendix 1 contains a glossary with a short description of each project.
AutoTutor and related systems in the family have tutored computer literacy
(Graesser et al. 2004a), conceptual physics (Graesser et al. 2003a; Rus et al.
2013c; VanLehn et al. 2007), biology (Olney et al. 2012), critical thinking
(Halpern et al. 2012; Hu and Graesser 2004; Millis et al. 2011), and other
topics. AutoTutor approaches have also been extended to push the boundaries
of the tutoring interaction, examining the impact of incorporating affect
(AutoTutor-AS; D’Mello and Graesser 2012a), gaze focus (GazeTutor; D’Mello
et al. 2012), metacognitive skills (MetaTutor; Azevedo et al. 2010), and 3D
simulations (AutoTutor-3D; Graesser et al. 2005a). Work has also been conducted to expand the accessibility of AutoTutor, such as a simplified open
source release (GnuTutor; Olney 2009), a constrained version designed for webbased authoring and delivery (AutoTutor Lite; Hu et al. 2009), and a framework for sharable web-based tutoring objects (Sharable Knowledge Objects;
Nye 2013; Wolfe et al. 2012).
In this paper, we first describe the rationale for natural language tutoring.
Subsequent major sections center on the three foundational topics addressed by
AutoTutor and later systems connected to the AutoTutor family: 1) humaninspired tutoring strategies, 2) pedagogical agents, and 3) technology that
supports natural language tutoring. Key empirical findings on these themes
and their contributions are summarized in the Discussion section, focusing on
learning gains, affect, metacognition, modality effects, and the roles of pedagogical agents. Finally, the paper concludes with a discussion of the future
directions, limitations, and implications of this work for dialog-based tutors and
learning technologies in general.

430

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

The Rationale for AutoTutor: Tutoring Through Discourse
Human tutors communicate with the student through discourse, which includes
natural language verbal messages, gestures, signals, and non-verbal communication. AutoTutor primarily communicates with learners using an animated
talking head that uses natural language (voice or text) and allows unconstrained
natural language responses from users. Other successful tutoring systems, such
as Cognitive Tutor (Aleven et al. 2009; Ritter et al. 2007) and Andes (VanLehn
et al. 2010), organize their interactions around problem-solving interactions
without discourse. This raises the question of why one would develop an
intelligent tutoring system around discourse rather than circumventing the
difficulties of natural language.
We would argue that the important question is not “Why use tutoring
discourse?” but instead “How and when should we use tutoring discourse?”
Discourse with the student opens up a range of new learning activities related
to expressing and communicating knowledge (e.g., self-reflection, answering
deep questions, generating questions, resolving conflicting statements). The
strengths of natural language tutoring complement a wide range of domains,
including traditional problem-solving. From the standpoint of Bloom’s traditional taxonomy of cognitive objectives (Bloom 1956), these activities emphasize
comprehending, analyzing, synthesizing, and evaluating knowledge (Anderson
and Krathwohl 2001). Dialog-based tutoring helps integrate concepts and
problem-solving with domain principles, scaffold domain-specific language,
implement abstract strategies, and generate qualitative inferences (Graesser
et al. 2001b). Dialog-based tutoring is less effective for remembering shallow
didactic facts (Graesser et al. 2004b; Person et al. 2003). Dialog-based tutoring
also cannot completely address certain skills and procedures (e.g., no amount of
talking about playing piano will make you a pianist if you cannot also
practice). As such, natural language tutoring and other types of ITS offer
somewhat different pedagogical experiences.
Both natural language and problem-solving tutoring systems support wellvalidated instructional principles such as timely feedback (Pashler et al. 2005;
Shute 2008), active engagement in learning (Prince 2004), difficulty of materials
in the zone of proximal development (Metcalfe and Kornell 2005; Wood and
Wood 1996), and taking advantage of “teachable moments” when a student
experiences an impasse or cognitive disequilibrium (Schwartz and Bransford
1998; VanLehn et al. 2003). However, there are other well-supported instructional
strategies that are naturally and distinctively incorporated into dialog. For example, asking context-sensitive deep reasoning questions (e.g., why, how, what if) is
one effective strategy in human tutoring (Graesser and Person 1994; Graesser
et al. 1995). Similarly, natural language helps a system harness self-explanations
(Chi et al. 1994), collaborative interaction (Chi et al. 2008; VanLehn et al. 2007),
fostering common ground and terminology (Graesser et al. 2009), and cognitive
flexibility through alternative viewpoints (Dillenbourg and Traum 2006; Rouet
2006). Natural language tutors arguably afford a wider range of tutoring interactions, so they are routinely considered in ITS research for tutoring new skills and
exploring the rich set of tutoring strategies inspired by human discourse.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

431

Human-Inspired Tutoring Strategies
Early intelligent tutoring systems had their foundations in expert systems and general
cognitive principles rather than tutoring principles specifically. Critiques of these early
ITS cited limited attention to modeling human tutoring behavior (Nwana 1990; Self
1990). More attention was placed on rigorously modeling human tutoring behaviors in
the early 1990’s. For example, Graesser and Person examined over 100 hours of human
tutoring interactions (Graesser and Person 1994; Graesser et al. 1995) and Merrill et al.
(1992) directly compared human tutoring against intelligent tutoring systems. Given
meta-analyses that showed human tutoring is effective (e.g., Cohen et al. 1982), there
were two central questions: What features of human tutoring help students learn, and
how can we implement these strategies in a computer tutor?
Research on the behaviors of human tutors ultimately led to the design of AutoTutor,
including work on collaborative tutoring dialogs (Graesser et al. 1995), pragmatic
factors in communication (Person et al. 1995), and strategies to infer student knowledge
from question and answer dialog (Person et al. 1994). However, this research also went
beyond these mechanisms native to human tutoring and explored more ideal strategies
that could be woven into the tutorial interaction. Tutoring strategies included extensive
use of deep-reasoning questions and their answers (AutoTutor and later iDRIVE),
collaborative lectures (Guru), learning progressions (DeepTutor), reading comprehension strategies (iSTART, iSTART-ME, CSAL), writing strategies (Writing-Pal), affect
and engagement detection (AutoTutor Affect-Sensitive, Supportive AutoTutor,
GazeTutor), and metacognitive skills such as critical thinking (SEEK, Operation
ARIES) and self-regulated learning (MetaTutor). While some of these strategies are
descriptive (i.e., observed in human tutoring sessions), many are not consistently or
rigorously applied by human tutors, but would be advocated according to ideal
principles of learning and pedagogy.
Compared to other natural language tutoring systems, the AutoTutor family has
distinguished itself by its strategies for helping students elaborate ideal answers and by
the breadth of domains it has tutored. These two factors are probably connected.
AutoTutor sessions primarily help students generate correct explanations that solve a
problem, while remedying students’ misconceptions is a secondary focus. Other
successful dialog systems, such as WHY2/Atlas and BEETLE (Graesser et al. 2001b;
Dzikovska et al. 2013), have emphasized targeting and repairing misconceptions.
While both approaches are effective, misconceptions tend to be highly domaindependent and are hard for experts to predict. AutoTutor’s emphasis on helping
students build ideal answers may explain why it has been able to transition to a variety
of domains, while the majority of natural language tutors focus on a single domain.
This approach limits natural language processing (NLP) to the specific topics for a
tutoring session, rather than relying on deep domain-specific NLP that cuts across all
dialogs. This strategy was inspired by human tutors, as will be discussed next.
AutoTutor’s 5-Step Tutoring Frame for Collaborative Reasoning
As mentioned earlier, a fundamental question that was: what patterns do typical human
tutors follow when tutoring? The discourse patterns of the earliest AutoTutor were
inspired by analyses of approximately 100 hours of non-expert human tutoring

432

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

interactions (Graesser et al. 1995). One corpus included dialogs of graduate students
tutoring undergraduate college students on research methods and statistics. A second
corpus documented high school students tutoring seventh-grade students on algebra
concepts. Non-expert tutors were studied because they perform the bulk of tutoring
even though they have moderate domain knowledge and have minimal training on
tutoring pedagogies. Moreover, an earlier meta-analysis showed that tutor training did
not significantly change learning outcomes (Cohen et al. 1982). Despite having
minimal training, non-expert tutors are effective. This finding suggested that nonexpert tutors use simple but effective tutoring strategies.
Graesser et al. (1995) reported that non-expert tutors used a limited repertoire of
strategies that were guided by an approximate assessment of a students’ knowledge.
Tutoring sessions showed little active student learning (i.e., students picking the topics),
advanced strategies (e.g., Socratic Method, faded scaffolding, modeling), truly anchored learning (i.e., real-life examples), convergence to shared meaning (i.e., precise
models of others’ knowledge), targeted error remediation (i.e., detecting misconceptions), or affective adaptation. Tutors mainly followed a curriculum script with a set of
topics from a chapter and a small set of abstract anchors (e.g., a problem from a
textbook) as a focal point for collaborative reasoning, explanations, and construction of
meaning.
Collaborative reasoning progressed in a 5-step tutoring frame: (1) Tutor poses a
question/problem, (2) Student attempts to answer, (3) Tutor provides brief evaluation as
feedback, (4) Collaborative interaction to improve the answer, and (5) Tutor checks if
student understands (Graesser et al. 1995). Question asking and answering was a key
feature of tutoring. Compared to classroom instruction, students asked many more
questions (~26/h vs. 0.1/h) and were asked more questions (104/h vs. 69/h; Graesser
and Person 1994). Deep questions and explanations are associated with better student
performance. Second, while tutors seldom explicitly pointed out specific misconceptions expressed by the student, they almost always reacted to such errors indirectly.
These indirect responses included hints, leading questions to get the student to articulate a correct piece of an answer, or simply asserting a correct answer. These strategies
were observed across two separate age groups and domains (Algebra and Research
Methods), so they appear to be domain-neutral.
Overall, the tutors “helped students explain good answers” rather than “identifying
and correcting misconceptions” (other than simple bugs and slips). This research
produced three central tenets to AutoTutor’s pedagogical approach at a macro-level:
1. Help students construct explanations of material, such as answers to questions and
solutions to challenging problems,
2. Ask questions that tap deep levels of reasoning and that involve collaboration, and
3. Solve problems that involve deep reasoning.
It should be noted that human tutors in Graesser et al. (1995) were not particularly
adept at the selection of questions and problems at a macro-level that was tailored to
particular students’ level of mastery. They tended to ask the same questions associated
with a lesson to many students in a scripted non-adaptive fashion. The tutors were
much more micro-adaptive but not macro-adaptive, although their micro-adaptivity
also used a limited set of strategies.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

433

These strategies are adaptive for non-expert tutors because they can interactively
scaffold explanations and solutions to problems despite a very limited understanding of
the student’s mental model. Since an ITS shares many of these limitations for establishing common ground and knowledge with students, these strategies offered a good
starting point for AutoTutor. These principles were the basis for the expectationcoverage strategy, as well as providing design principles for delivering tutoring discourse moves. AutoTutor also included misconception-detection and correction even
though student misconceptions are not reliably detected by novice tutors. In practice,
finding a good coverage for misconceptions often requires multiple design iterations
because the space of possible misunderstandings is vast and even experts have trouble
anticipating or diagnosing students’ misconceptions. Together, the expectationcoverage and misconception-correction strategies form an expectation-misconception
discourse framework, which will be described in detail later. Around the same time that
this strategy was developed, latent semantic analysis (LSA) emerged in natural language processing (Deerwester et al. 1990; Landauer et al. 1998). LSA, which will be
described later, is a statistical method that can compute the similarity of a student
statement against various expectations and misconceptions for the concepts being
tutored. The convergence of the 5-step tutoring frame, semantic analysis tools such
as LSA, and the increasing functionality of animated talking agents provided the three
pillars supporting early AutoTutor.
Early versions of AutoTutor attempted to simulate the discourse moves of human
tutors (e.g., sentences, verbal responses, and non-verbal responses) in a manner that is
sensitive to the system’s estimates of what the student knows. AutoTutor focuses on the
subject matter content of dialogs and the information transferred between the tutor
agent and the human student. Domain-relevant dialog is the primary method of
conveying information in the system. However, as discussed later, extensions to
AutoTutor have added capabilities to detect and transmit nonverbal information such
as affective or metacognitive cues.
To help ground the discussion, a physics dialog between AutoTutor and a learner is
presented in Table 1. The dialog is annotated to note the discourse moves used by the
tutoring agent on each step. In this dialog, AutoTutor is working with a learner to help
them explain that two objects in free fall will have the same acceleration. The student
initially explains the concept partially, but does not phrase it using physics terms, so the
tutor pumps for more information. In response to the pump, the student responds with a
related correct statement but does not address the acceleration. This leads the tutor to
provide a hint to get the student to talk about acceleration. In response, the student asks
a definitional question about the meaning of acceleration that the tutor answers. After
this, the tutor repeats the question and the student provides a good answer. Since the
student has not stated the direction of the acceleration, the tutor provides a prompt to
help the student articulate that the force of gravity acts downward on the objects. If a
student cannot cover an expectation despite many hints and prompts, the system will
use an assertion to explain the right answer.
AutoTutor relies on a set of distinct discourse moves, with key moves described in
Table 2 (Graesser 2011). These dialog moves are driven by an expectation-misconception tailored discourse framework. The tutoring system stores a set of anticipated
correct answers (expectations) and a set of invalid answers frequently expressed by
students (misconceptions). Semantic analysis tools evaluate how well student input

434

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

Table 1 Sample discourse on conceptual physics
AutoTutor <Main Question>: Suppose a boy is in a free-falling elevator and he holds his keys motionless in
front of his him and he lets go. What will happen to the keys? Explain why.
Student: The keys would not move but hover at the start point.
AutoTutor <Pump>: I bet you can explain this a little bit more.
Student: The velocity of the keys is the same due to gravity.
AutoTutor <Hint>: What about the acceleration of the objects involved?
Student: What is acceleration again?
AutoTutor <Answer>: Let me try to answer your question. Acceleration is the rate that velocity changes over
time, like getting faster or getting slower. Acceleration is a vector quantity, so it needs to have a direction.
AutoTutor <Hint>: Let’s try this again. What about the acceleration of the objects involved?
Student: The acceleration of the objects in the elevator are the same as the acceleration of the elevator which is
the earth’s gravitational acceleration.
AutoTutor <Short Feedback>: Good job!
AutoTutor <Prompt>: Try this. What direction are the objects going? The objects are falling <hand gesture to
cue the student to express something>?
Student: downward
AutoTutor <Short Feedback>: Right.
AutoTutor <Prompt-completion>: The objects are falling downward.

covers these expectations and detects their misconceptions so that the system can
respond with appropriate discourse moves. Semantic pattern matching algorithms
determine the match between student input and the expectations or misconceptions,
whereas semantic pattern completion mechanisms generate the AutoTutor’s discourse
moves to guide students to fill in missing information. User input can be compared to
expectations and misconceptions through a variety of semantic analysis techniques,
including latent semantic analysis (LSA), regular expressions, word-frequency overlap
techniques, and logical entailment (Cai et al. 2011; Graesser et al. 2007b; Rus et al.
2008).
As shown in Table 2, the core discourse moves fill two high-level roles of tutoring
discourse: eliciting information from the student and delivering information to the
student. A main question initiates each dialog. This is the most superordinate level of
the dialog, which encourages deep reasoning to address a fundamental question.
AutoTutor dialogs traditionally start with open-ended questions, which have 2–10
expectations (good responses) and 0 to 5 misconceptions (responses that require
remediation). Each expectation covers a distinct facet of the ideal answer to the main
question. Pumps, hints, and prompts encourage the student to provide more information
about each expectation/misconception, with varying degrees of context to lead the
student to express increasingly specific information. Short feedback, assertions, corrections, answers, and summaries provide information to students, allowing AutoTutor
to correct erroneous statements and review concepts with students who are struggling to
produce relevant answers. Each of these discourse moves serves a unique role within
the tutoring interaction and is tied to specific dialog and tutoring agent actions (e.g.,
gestures, facial expressions, calling up diagrams) to help students master concepts from
the domain.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

435

Table 2 Autotutor discourse moves
Move Type

Description

Example(s)

Main Question

A question that starts off
the dialog, focused on
a particular topic or goal

“If the man drops his keys just
as the elevator falls, how do the
objects move relative to each
other? Explain why.”

Pump

Asking the student to
provide more information.

“Anything else?”

Hint

Leading question or statement
that attempt to get the user
to direct the user to answering
the main question.

“What do you think about the
gravitational force on this object?”

Prompt

Leading the student to express a
missing word from an important
idea for the main question.

“The force on the objects from gravity
acts in which direction?”

Short Feedback

Signaling about the quality of the
student’s last statement.

“Great!” (Positive)
“Okay.” (Neutral)
“Not quite.” (Negative)

Correction

Correcting a misconception or
incorrect statement by the learner.

“No, the force of gravity on both
objects is equal.” (After student
claims one is greater)

Assertion

Presenting an important idea
within the problem or the answer
to the problem.

“The force of gravity on both objects is equal.”

Answer

Response to a learner’s question
about the definition of a concept.

“A vector is a quantity with both a
magnitude and a direction.”
(In response to “What is a vector?”)

Summary

Presents the full answer to the main
question or problem.

“The magnitude of the force of gravity
on each object is equal and all force
vectors point down, so…”

For a full physics problem similar to Table 1 that has many expectations, the dialog
can last up to 30 to 100 turns before all expectations are fully covered (Graesser et al.
2005b). However, more knowledgeable students are likely to cover expectations in
fewer turns by producing responses with higher relevance. Fewer turns occur for highknowledge students because AutoTutor tracks a student’s overall contributions for each
dialog, which acts as a conversation-specific model of which expectations the student
knew. More recent systems have also used this information as part of more advanced
student models, such as models that estimate affective states (D’Mello and Graesser
2010) and persistent student models (Nye et al. 2014b). Using tutoring dialogs based on
this general form, AutoTutor variants have been developed to teach concepts from a
variety of domains, primarily in science, technology, and more recently mathematics.
Across the AutoTutor family, most tutoring dialogs have used variations on this 5step frame and set of speech acts. The earliest versions of AutoTutor followed this
pattern closely, while later systems have paired it with complementary strategies, such
as vicarious learning or teachable agents (Craig et al. 2006; Millis et al. 2011). While a
few systems, such as Guru (Olney et al. 2012), follow somewhat different patterns, the

436

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

5-step frame remains a common tutoring mode. Of the five steps, the last (asking if the
student understands) is the most commonly omitted or replaced with more effective
evaluations of student understanding (e.g., knowledge-check questions). This is because students’ assessment of their understanding is typically poor. Since the
AutoTutor’s authoring tools allow custom dialog rules, variations on these frames are
common, but the overall structure is in use today.
Deep Reasoning Questions
Within this 5-step frame, the earliest versions of AutoTutor explored questions about
the effectiveness of deep reasoning questions and the associated collaborative interactions. A key question was: what levels of knowledge show the most learning gains and
which components of the discourse impact those gains? While the 5-step tutoring frame
can revolve around other learning activities, AutoTutor focused on scaffolding the
student’s natural language explanation to a deep question or solution to a problem,
which remains a central strategy of later systems. Appendix 2 notes the different dialog
patterns used by different tutors discussed in this paper. This section discusses strategies
used to help students effectively generate explanations to questions that require deep
reasoning. Studies are presented that demonstrate the ability of this strategy to transfer
effectively to multiple domains, such as computer literacy and physics.
Deep reasoning questions must be answered using explanations, the latter of which
are known to produce learning gains (Chi et al. 1994; McNamara and Magliano 2009).
Deep reasoning questions have steps such as tend to start with “Why,” “How,” or
“What if.” By comparison, shallower questions such as “What” or “Which one” tend to
elicit short answers. A taxonomy of deep, intermediate, and shallow question categories
was developed in Graesser and Person (1994). Six types of deep questions are present
in the current taxonomy: antecedents (Why/how was this caused?), consequences
(What-if? What-next?), goal-orientation (Why would someone do this?), enablement
(What allows this?), interpretational (What could this mean?), and expectational (Why
didn’t this happen?). A typical AutoTutor tutorial dialog starts with a deep question
from this taxonomy to promote reasoning about domain content and relationships.
Students are seldom able to answer these questions without tutoring support, so each
main question typically leads to a long series of dialog turns where pumps, hints,
prompts, and assertions are used to help the student type a full explanation for the deep
reasoning question.
AutoTutor’s first iteration was designed to tutor computer literacy skills, such
as the fundamentals of computer hardware, operating systems, and the internet
(Graesser et al. 2004b, 1999). A curriculum script was designed for the topic of
computer literacy. This script was a systematically organized set of deep questions, concepts, corrections, examples, and question-answer pairs. Each topic
included a main question, some basic concepts (e.g., key parts of a computer
relevant to the question), relevant expectations, anticipated misconceptions, anticipated definitional questions, and a space of discourse moves needed during the
conversation (e.g., corrections for misconceptions, answers for definitional questions, hints, hint completions, prompts, prompt completions, a summary). This
script provided the problem-specific content for AutoTutor to expect and deliver
to the student during tutoring. In designing a curriculum script, each main

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

437

question was generated by a curriculum designer and was intended to tap deep
systems understanding and causal mechanisms on a topic covered by the textbook
chapter.
AutoTutor attempted to get the student to articulate each expectation by expressing
pumps (e.g., “what else?”), then a hint, then a prompt, and then simply asserting the
answer (a bottom out response); this pump → hint → prompt → assertion cycle
stopped as soon as the expectation was covered. A good student could articulate the
answer with minimal tutoring guidance (i.e., pump or hint) whereas lower ability
students needed prompts for specific words or the tutoring directly asserting the
expectation (Jackson and Graesser 2006). Moreover, the hints and prompts were
carefully generated to fill in the missing content words in the expectation; this adhered
to the pattern completion principle that was discussed earlier.
Different versions of AutoTutor were evaluated, each using a small set of fuzzy
production rules to drive dialog. AutoTutor 1.1 moved on from a topic after the student
covered the expectation or after the tutor delivered a bottom-out assertion. AutoTutor
2.0 continued with a cycle of hints, prompts, and assertions until the student said the
material, making them restate their understanding of even a bottom-out assertion before
continuing (Person et al. 2003). Despite these differences, both versions performed
comparably to each other and both showed learning gains of approximately 0.5σ over
controls who studied relevant textbook chapters for an equivalent amount of time.
These effect sizes were highly dependent on the type of evaluation test question, with
gains of 0.15σ for shallow questions, 0.28σ for deep questions, and 0.64σ for cloze
questions (i.e.., filling in words of an explanation). This foreshadowed a pattern of
higher learning gains for deep reasoning with AutoTutor (Graesser et al. 2004b, 2010).
For a second type of evaluation, a bystander Turing test was conducted to determine
whether outsiders could discriminate if a specific tutoring turn was produced by
AutoTutor or a human tutor. Bystanders could not differentiate between AutoTutor
and the human tutor (Graesser et al. 2005a).
Additional work implemented idealized strategies based on general learning principles derived from the field of education and controlled laboratory studies. To promote
active learning, one strategy used two cycles of hints, prompts, and assertions. For
example, a low-knowledge student might provide little input for the first cycle, but after
the tutor asserted the answer, could generate more in the second cycle. This process was
abandoned because learners found the two-cycle process frustrating. A second strategy
encouraged students to generate questions for the tutor to answer, which correlates with
learning and can improve meta-cognitive skills (Rosenshine et al. 1996). Unfortunately,
AutoTutor was not capable of answering all student questions so this strategy was not
feasible. Established learning principles, such as those described in Graesser (2009),
continue to drive AutoTutor strategies, but more subtly: interactions are tuned iteratively, balancing many principles, rather than necessarily trying to maximize a single
principle. While lab experiments often detect effects as if they are simple, linear, and
additive (e.g., “active learning is good”), in practice these effects can have diminishing
gains and compete with other principles (e.g., “active learning vs. engagement”). Later
research examined more nuanced variations of tutoring discourse, such as Kopp et al.
(2012) investigation of the dosage levels for interactive tutoring, as described later.
Shortly after applications to computer literacy, AutoTutor was applied to the domain
of Newtonian physics concepts as part of the WHY2/AutoTutor project (often

438

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

shortened to WHY/AutoTutor). The WHY2 project was intended as a conceptual
successor to the early WHY tutoring architecture for tutoring students on interactions
within physical systems (Graesser et al. 2001b; Stevens and Collins 1977). This work
was developed as one of two parallel approaches to this problem, the other being the
WHY2/Atlas project that added dialog capabilities to the Andes tutoring system
(VanLehn et al. 2010). WHY2/AutoTutor and WHY2/Atlas systems differed significantly in how they managed dialog. WHY2/Atlas treated dialogs as a finite state graph
and emphasized detection of misconceptions, which would trigger sub-dialogs for
further diagnosis and remediation (Freedman et al. 2004; Jordan et al. 2006). WHY2/
Atlas also used a physics-specific hybrid classifier for student statements that included
dialog templates for physics formulas (e.g., velocity, acceleration), a semantic grammar,
and a Bayesian bag-of-words classifier (e.g., similar to LSA in AutoTutor). By
comparison, AutoTutor employed a less structured approach to physics semantic
evaluation (e.g., adding some basic negation handling) and relied more on the statistical
attributes of LSA in semantic matching to expectations and misconceptions. Despite
using significantly different approaches to dialog management and semantic matching,
both systems performed comparably.
Systematic assessments of AutoTutor in WHY2 on learning gains have been
reported (Graesser et al. 2003a; VanLehn et al. 2007). Learning was measured using
tests with 4 essay questions and 40 multiple choice questions, many of which were
adapted from the Force Concept Inventory (Hestenes et al. 1992). These studies
revealed that both WHY2/AutoTutor and WHY2/Atlas performed comparably to
non-expert human tutors and with each other. A second study used a pretest/posttest
design to compare WHY2/AutoTutor against reading a textbook for a comparable
amount of time and against a control condition with no physics materials. This study
found learning gains of 0.61σ for students in the AutoTutor condition over the control
posttest mean and 1.22σ over the read-textbook posttest mean. Normalized learning
gains [(posttest-pretest)/(1.0 – pretest)] showed that students in the AutoTutor condition
gained 0.32σ while students in the read-textbook condition gained only 0.04σ over
reading irrelevant information. Overall, this confirmed that AutoTutor performed
significantly better than both the read-textbook and the control condition. Follow-up
studies have shown even greater advantages of AutoTutor over a read-textbook control
(Graesser et al. 2012a, b).
The results presented in this section demonstrate how AutoTutor was able to
transition to a second domain, from computer literacy to physics. Additionally, it
performed comparably to another dialog-based tutor with physics-specific natural
language processing and remediation strategies. This indicates that helping students
generate explanations to deep reasoning questions is a powerful, domain-independent
tutoring strategy.
Expert Strategies and Collaborative Lecturing
Later work at Memphis considered the question of whether the patterns of
expert tutors show different and potentially more-effective strategies than typical tutors (D’Mello et al. 2010b). Since the effect of tutor expertise on learning
outcomes is murky due to the lack of a clear definition for an expert tutor
(VanLehn 2011), this research focused on highly-qualified practicing tutors. A

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

439

dozen expert tutors in the Memphis areas were identified, whose qualifications
included teaching licenses, five or more years as a tutor, employment at a
tutoring agency, and excellent references. Researchers coded 50 h of expert
tutoring dialogs to identify dialog moves and dialog modes (D’Mello et al.
2010b; Olney et al. 2012). Expert tutors sometimes used more flexible and
complex tutoring strategies than non-experts, but most often used similar
approaches as non-expert tutors. The vast majority of dialog moves were
scaffolding (46 % of turns) and mini-lectures (30 % of turns).
While expert tutors are often reported to be more interactive (VanLehn 2011),
expert tutors in this study spent large amounts of time giving mini-lectures. Since
this was not a head-to-head comparison against novice tutors, the implications are
not cut-and-dry, though some other studies have reported that expert tutors
provided summaries and procedural (how-to) instruction more than novice tutors
(Lu et al. 2007). Analysis of the transitions between dialog modes revealed that
experts usually alternated lecturing with scaffolding (i.e., explain first and help the
student work on a problem/question second; D’Mello et al. 2010b). Overall,
lectures were not monologues but were interactive: shorter explanations punctuated by checks for understanding using metacognitive questions (e.g., “Do you
understand?”) and short questions/problems to elicit student knowledge. These
were described as collaborative lecturing, which is lecturing interleaved with
shallow questions (D’Mello et al. 2010a).
To explore its effectiveness as a tutoring style, the Guru tutor implemented
collaborative lecturing as its primary interaction style (Olney et al. 2012). Guru
used collaborative lecturing and exercises that required the students to generate
summaries, complete concept maps, and finish cloze tasks. Student performance
on these tasks was used to determine which concepts the tutor should target
and to determine when the session is complete. This targeting is part of a larger
shift toward mixing tutoring with applying knowledge (e.g., problems, exercises), which provide practice and also diagnose concepts where the student
struggles.
Guru covers 120 biology topics from the Tennessee Biology I curriculum. Guru
produced strong learning gains, approximately 0.72σ on a posttest covering biology
concepts versus controls who received classroom instruction only (Olney et al. 2012).
Compared to AutoTutor, Guru’s collaborative lecturing, concept maps, and targeting
dialog based on concept map performance represent significant departures. The relative
importance of these different elements on learning gains is still being explored.
Research on the impact of concept maps will be described in more detail in the section
on “Complementary Media”.
One takeaway from this line of research was that collaborative lecturing can
be an effective tutoring strategy. Since this strategy can also be implemented in
other AutoTutor systems, this research supported an additional interaction style
which can complement deep reasoning questions. Since both strategies appear
effective for both high and low knowledge students, further research is needed
to help determine which traits of the student and domain content determine
when each approach is more effective. Teasing out when certain strategies
should be preferred requires larger samples of human expert tutoring sessions
or comparisons of different ITS conditions.

440

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

Learning Progressions
A more recent research question has investigated the impact of adding macro-adaptivity
to AutoTutor-style natural-language tutoring. The original AutoTutor dialogs were
micro-adaptive (e.g., adapted within a conversation), but they did not use macroadaptivity (e.g., selecting different main questions for different students). Macroadaptivity is considered an ideal strategy because most human tutors do not reliably
implement it. While human tutors may try to track student knowledge across many
sessions, there is no clear evidence that tutors can maintain accurate learner models
(Graesser et al. 2009). Macro-adaptivity is particularly important when tutoring over
longer periods and when students start with unequal knowledge. The recent DeepTutor
project added a macro-adaptive system based on learning progressions for Newtonian
physics (Rus et al. 2013a, c). Learning progressions posit that learners go through a
pathway of knowledge states, where each state has distinct patterns of understanding
and misconceptions.
DeepTutor integrates verbal contributions and problem-based assessment into the
detection of learner states by using conversation and short multiple-choice tests to
diagnose learning states (Rus et al. 2013c). The system maps student statements and
problem-solving activity to different states of understanding each concept. While
AutoTutor considers each expectation and misconception independently, DeepTutor
associates responses with a spot on the “path” for mastery. For example, some
expectations and misconceptions only occur at high levels of understanding. To
improve identification of learner knowledge, DeepTutor has applied more advanced
natural language processing techniques that include optimized word-to-word similarity
and negation handling (Rus et al. 2013c). A recent small-scale evaluation (n=30) of
DeepTutor showed pretest-posttest learning gains of 0.79σ for a 1-h training session
when macro-adaptivity was included (Rus et al. 2014), compared to very little learning
when dialogs were not selected dynamically. If even a fraction of this difference is
maintained over longer training intervals, adding macro-adaptivity could be a major
advance.
Reading Comprehension Strategy Tutoring
While much of AutoTutor’s family have focused on STEM domains, a parallel question
was posed: what tutoring strategies are required to train text comprehension strategies,
which differ from problem-solving domains like physics? The design of iSTART
(Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking) was contemporary to
AutoTutor and focused on improving reading comprehension (McNamara et al. 2006).
iSTART employs ensembles of agents for tutoring reading comprehension (McNamara
et al. 2007). iSTART discourse differs from AutoTutor, concentrating on strategy
training rather than content coverage, though self-explanation still plays a major role.
iSTART strategies include paraphrasing sentences, bridging the current sentence to
previous material, predicting later content, and elaborating on content by connecting it
to personal knowledge. Additional semantic analysis, such as textual entailment, is
used to determine the quality of paraphrasing. iSTART improved reading comprehension differently for skilled readers than for less-skilled readers, for both college students
and middle-schoolers (Magliano et al. 2005; McNamara et al. 2006). Less-skilled

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

441

readers improved on questions about the content of a single sentence. More skilled
readers improved on bridging questions, which link knowledge from two or more
sentences.
To support extended practice, a game-based version called iSTART-ME (iSTART –
Motivationally Enhanced) was developed (Jackson et al. 2010). While the game-based
version produced longer contributions, these contributions were of lower quality during
a short intervention and only reached equal quality during a multi-week intervention
(Jackson et al. 2011). A third system, Writing-Pal (W-Pal), was designed to tutor
writing skills relevant to argument essays (McNamara et al. 2012). Writing-Pal features
automated essay assessment that gives students feedback on their writing skills (Roscoe
and McNamara 2013).
A second line of reading comprehension research started in 2012. As part of the
Center for the Study of Adult Literacy (CSAL) project, a tutoring system for improving
reading comprehension has been developed. This intervention is designed to help
adults who struggle with reading and comprehension of print media. This tutoring
system uses a web service driven by scripts authored by the AutoTutor Authoring Tools
(ASAT), which is described in the discussion of authoring tools. Compared to prior
systems, CSAL is focusing significantly on connecting dialog with interactive interfaces and multimedia. It is difficult for struggling readers to generate text, so the CSAL
project uses web media as a secondary channel to communicate with the learner, such
as detecting clicks on an interactive graphic that the student can manipulate.
Overall, this line of research has two significant takeaways. First, natural language
tutoring systems for reading comprehension must employ significantly different
tutoring strategies. Instead of helping the student explain domain concepts, the focus
switches to practicing and scaffolding comprehension skills that must be measured
based on the students’ use of natural language. Second, this has implications for natural
language processing. At very low levels of comprehension, learners cannot even be
expected to type answers. At higher levels, more advanced processing (e.g., entailment)
is required to determine if comprehension strategies have been mastered.
Beyond Domain Information: Affect
Researchers have often hypothesized that emotions are an important dimension of
human tutoring (Lepper and Woolverton 2002). This raises a few questions: what
emotions are important to help tutors adapt, what data can help reliably detect such
emotions, and who benefits from adapting to such emotions? AutoTutor-AS (Affect
Sensitive, also known as Emotion Sensitive) incorporated affect detection by monitoring body posture, facial expressions, and discourse to classify student emotional states
(D’Mello and Graesser 2010, 2012a; D’Mello et al. 2007). Interestingly, the natural
language discourse channel had a large impact on predicting emotions such as frustration, confusion, and engagement. For example, affective states are detected by discourse coherence, matches of student contributions to expectations, verbal fluency,
hinting, and tutor feedback. Discourse features offer key information about task
performance (e.g., are they failing to match the ideal answer?) and activity level
(e.g., are they typing a lot or very little?). Discourse context is important for interpreting
physical expressions (e.g., facial, posture) and both channels (discourse and physical)
improve detection of affect. AutoTutor-AS refers to the system with affect-detection,

442

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

which can be used to build tutors with different strategies for dealing with affect, such
as the Supportive AutoTutor.
D’Mello and Graesser (2012) compared a Supportive AutoTutor with a standard
(neutral) AutoTutor for their impact on learning gains. The Supportive AutoTutor
empathized with the learner when there were negative user emotions and attributed
such difficulties to the material (as opposed to the learner). The Supportive AutoTutor
was more effective for low knowledge students (0.71σ gain on posttest scores) when
compared to standard AutoTutor, but such gains were only evident on a second session
when student difficulty was more pronounced. High knowledge students did not benefit
from affect sensitivity at all and sometimes showed lower learning when given
emotional support. A buddy-style Shakeup Tutor that attributed emotions to the learner
rather than the material did not show positive benefits for learners (D’Mello and
Graesser 2012).
Disengagement behaviors have also been considered. The GazeTutor project extended GuruTutor by using a camera to capture student eye-movement data and using
that to allow the tutoring agent to react to student gaze, in particular to detect and react
to student disengagement (D’Mello et al. 2012). When students appeared disengaged
when it was talking, GazeTutor would react by saying statements like “Please pay
attention.” This was particularly relevant to Guru, which used interactive lecturing
rather than highly interactive tutoring. GazeTutor succeeded at increasing attention to
the tutor and resulted in small, but not statistically significant overall learning gains
(0.26σ, p<.178) and moderate, statistically significant gains on deep learning (0.45σ,
p<.035).
These lines of research indicated that disengagement and negative emotions, such as
frustration, are important for tutor adaptation. D’Mello and Graesser (2012b) used data
from AutoTutor-AS to develop a model of learning-relevant emotions which includes
engagement, surprise, frustration, delight/achievement, disengagement, confusion, and
boredom. This model posited that inducing some short-term confusion could be
beneficial for learning, which has been verified experimentally (D’Mello et al. 2014;
Lehman et al. 2013) verified. Combined with earlier findings, this indicates that
learning is improved when (a) disengagement is reduced (e.g., by reacting to gaze),
(b) brief confusion is induced (e.g., by presenting conflicting information), and (c)
frustrated learners with low knowledge receive affective support.
Learning about Thinking: Metacognition
AutoTutor descendants have also been applied to study critical thinking, metacognition,
and self-regulated learning. The SEEK (Source, Evidence, Explanation, and Knowledge) web tutor was designed to help college students improve their critical thinking by
evaluating the credibility and relevance of information as part of the scientific inquiry
process (Graesser et al. 2007c). SEEK did not use a full dialog system, but instead
embedded spoken hints and structured note-taking to evaluate the information hit
during a constrained web search (seven cached sites). Six primary skills were practiced:
(1) Asking deep questions, (2) Collecting information from multiple sources, (3)
Evaluating the validity of information, (4) Integrating information from multiple
sources, (5) Resolving inconsistencies, and (6) Constructing a causal model of a
system. Unfortunately, this tutor did not significantly improve students’ skills in finding

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

443

relevant information. This lack of improvement was mainly attributed to short length of
training (1 h), combined with the complexity of each skill involved (e.g., asking deep
questions).
Operation ARIES (Acquiring Research, Investigative, and Evaluative Skills) also
targeted critical thinking skills in a serious game (Millis et al. 2011). Operation ARA
(Acquiring Research Acumen) continued this work by refining and extending ARIES
into a learning game for wider distribution by Pearson Education (Halpern et al. 2012).
ARIES/ARA address a set of skills more specifically related to scientific inquiry, such
as: Theories and hypotheses, Independent and dependent variables, Validity, Replication of results, Experimental controls, Sample size, Experimenter bias, Making causal
claims, and Generalizability. One component of ARIES/ARA attempts to get the
student to articulate scientific principles in natural language by using the pump-hintprompt-assertion cycles of AutoTutor. Another pedagogical approach is to present
specific research cases that have methodological flaws and to ask students to articulate
the flaws in natural language.
While the game has not yet been compared against static materials (e.g.,
texts), evaluations of Operation ARA reported learning gains of 1.4σ on a test
of scientific research skills when compared with controls who received no
instruction (Halpern et al. 2012). Compared to SEEK, this success may possibly
be attributed to additional time-on-task and a more cohesive set of skills.
Students used ARA between 8 and 12 h, an order of magnitude longer. There
were also motivational features through game elements, such as a coherent
game narrative and Jeopardy-like training rounds. ARA also used much more
AutoTutor discourse compared to SEEK, with a mixture of tutoring and vicarious learning (watching agents talk with each other). SEEK relied significantly
on supporting self-regulated search, whereas ARA’s more structured environment could have also influenced learning gains.
Self-regulated learning skills (SRL) motivated the design of MetaTutor, which used
discourse-based agents to support a hypermedia learning environment covering biology
topics (Azevedo et al. 2010). Like AutoTutor-AS, a recent version of MetaTutor used
real time analysis of facial expressions to classify student emotions during tutoring.
Azevedo et al. (2012) reported higher learning efficiency when tutors assisted students
with prompts and feedback as they explored the hypermedia pages (0.84σ). However,
that learning efficiency score included only time spent interacting with the material and
not time interacting with the agents. After considering the entire time spent using the
system, learning efficiency was approximately equal. Even if learning efficiency for the
domain is unchanged, improved self-regulated learning might offer valuable long-term
benefits. Unfortunately, other research groups (e.g., Roll et al. 2011) have likewise
failed to show that improving self-regulated help-seeking changes domain-specific
learning gains even over multiple-month interventions.
With that said, a few studies have shown that supporting self-assessment (Long and
Aleven 2013) and other metacognitive skills (Koedinger et al. 2009) can improve
domain learning gains. More research is still needed to definitively show which selfregulated learning skills improve learning in specific domains, as well as metacognitive
skills training transfers to new systems and domains. In general, research needs to
determine when tutoring SRL outweighs the benefits of spending time directly tutoring
domain content.

444

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

Pedagogical Agents and Complementary Media
AutoTutor uses a mixture of media and animated pedagogical agents to deliver tutoring
dialogs. While educational software implemented basic animated agents (e.g., sprites)
since the start of personal computers, advances in graphics in the mid-1990’s made
more advanced animated agents feasible. AutoTutor emerged during a wave of research
on animated interface agents (Dehn and Van Mulken 2000; Johnson et al. 2000; Nwana
1996), a trend that continued within educational technology and ITS specifically.
AutoTutor was part of an early generation of animated agents in tutoring systems and
intelligent environments, along with contemporary systems such as STEVE (Johnson
and Rickel 1997), Baldi (Massaro 1998), Cosmo (Lester et al. 1998) and the Teachable
Agents project (Brophy et al. 1999).
The original AutoTutor relied on a talking head driven by Microsoft Agent that
incorporated speech synthesis and supported facial expressions and intonation that were
tied to the quality of student contributions (Graesser et al. 1999). Figure 2 shows an
example of this early AutoTutor interface. While the quality of animation and speech
synthesis has improved drastically since this time, the role of the animated agent has
remained fairly consistent up until recently. The tutoring agent in AutoTutor offers a
universal interface that students can understand, across a variety of subject matters.
Additionally, agent conversations are interactive and capable of offering speech rather
than text when this is needed. This line of research has spanned multiple major projects
exploring the value and role of pedagogical agents.
Projects have recently shifted from using single-agent interfaces to multiple agents,
part of a larger trend in ITS where ensembles of agents are increasingly common

Fig. 2 Early AutoTutor Interface

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

445

(Graesser et al. 2008, 2014; Halpern et al. 2012; McNamara and Magliano 2009; Millis
et al. 2011; Woolf 2009). Table 3 lists common types of roles that pedagogical agents
can play in a tutoring system. The roles for pedagogical agents have undergone
significant shifts over time. Single non-interactive presenters, opponent agents (e.g.,
chess opponents), and non-player characters that populate a reactive game world were
already common before systems like AutoTutor emerged. While such agents are still
used, AutoTutor and similar systems have contributed to the development of a new
generation of pedagogical roles, such as vicarious learning presenters (iDRIVE; Craig
et al. 2006), affectively supportive agents (Supportive AutoTutor; D’Mello and
Graesser 2012a), student peer agents (Operation ARIES; Millis et al. 2011), and agents
that enhance virtual worlds (VCAEST; Shubeck et al. 2012). As with all new technologies, there have also been dead ends. This section reviews significant findings related
to the features and roles of animated agents, as well as complementary media such as
simulations (AutoTutor-3D; Graesser et al. 2005a) and concept maps (Guru; Olney
et al. 2012).
Surface Features: Animation and Speech
A key question for research on animated pedagogical agents has been what features
contribute to learning. Studies with AutoTutor have indicated that the content of
conversations is more important than the delivery medium or input modality (Nye
et al. 2014a). For example, work with AutoTutor showed no statistically significant
degradation for lesioned versions that lacked the animated talking head or conversed
using text rather than speech (Graesser et al. 2003b). Both factors were secondary to the
presenting the right content, since removing the agent animation (no avatar) or presenting print only (no avatar or voice) each resulted in a statistically non-significant
−0.13σ reduction in learning gains (Graesser et al. 2003b; Link et al. 2001). The
redundancy effect for multimedia learning, which posits that duplicating text and voice

Table 3 Common animated pedagogical agent roles
Role

Purpose

Presenter

Non-interactive agent that delivers static content.

Tutor

Supports learning by asking questions and giving
trustworthy information.

Peer/Student

Acts as a peer learner and may demonstrate either
correct answers or misconceptions. May sometimes
be a teachable agent that can learn to perform certain
tasks over time.

Supportive

Provides affective or motivational feedback
(e.g., “Let’s keep trying.”).

Opponent

Competes against the learner on some task or game.

Navigational

Helps the learner decide what to do next or locate
learning materials

Non Player Character (NPC)

Reacts to user behavior as part of an interactive world
or simulation.

446

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

hurts learning, was also tested using AutoTutor. Contrary to studies that showed
negative effects for redundant voice and text, Graesser et al. (2008) reported a nonsignificant positive (+0.34σ) impact on learning, rather than a negative effect.
Later research tested the impact of students providing their answers with
voice input as compared with typed text. Voice input and typed input performed
comparably, with a slight advantage to text input due to errors in voice
recognition (D’Mello et al. 2011). Overall, this research strongly indicates that
the content, rather than the animation or speech, is primarily responsible for
learning gains.
Vicarious Agent Demonstrations
Another line of research has investigated the question of whether students can learn by
watching one agent tutoring another student agent. Craig et al. (2006) developed
iDRIVE (Instruction with Deep-Level Reasoning Questions in Vicarious Environments) to study this approach. This project compared the effectiveness of AutoTutor
tutoring interactions against a vicarious learning system where a peer student agent
asked a series of deep questions and a teacher agent promptly answered each question,
with no meaningful input by the user (i.e., vicarious learning by observation). This
vicarious learning research followed up on a study that reported that adaptive conversational interaction was only slightly more effective than presenting succinct, targeted
script content that directly answered the main question (Graesser et al. 2004b). Research on iDRIVE revealed that vicarious learning with deep questions performed
comparably to AutoTutor on physics (Gholson et al. 2009). Vicarious dialogs where the
peer student modeled asking deep questions also increased question asking by students,
which is a metacognitive strategy that improves learning (Craig et al. 2006; Rosenshine
et al. 1996).
iDRIVE lead to studies that examined different vicarious self-explanations
(Craig et al. 2012). These studies evaluated learning gains under four conditions:
a content monolog, questions + answer content responses, “self-explanations”
stated by a peer agent, and questions + self-explanations. A study of college
students reported that low knowledge students benefited significantly more from
the question + explanation condition (34 % learning gain vs. 7 % for high
knowledge students; Craig et al. 2012). A follow-up study examined highschool students in different ability tracks (honors vs. standard), but comparable
prior knowledge on pre-tests. This study found that students of both honors and
standard classes significantly benefited from questions + explanations (p<0.01),
with honors students showing slightly higher learning gains (Craig et al. 2012).
Considering both studies, these findings imply that that low knowledge students,
even with different ability levels, benefit from vicarious “self-explanations” that
help build a mental model. Craig et al. (2012) hypothesized that high-knowledge
students benefit less due to mismatches between the students’ existing mental
models and the agents’ explanations. These results indicate that vicarious deep
questioning and explanations, which are significantly simpler to author than
dynamic tutoring, can offer significant advantages for students with low knowledge. In particular, vicarious dialogs can model new skills and interactions (e.g.,
question-asking) that the human learner cannot yet accomplish even with help.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

447

Trialogs: Tutor, Peer Student, and Human Student
A landmark extension of AutoTutor combined vicarious learning with interactive
tutoring in order to take advantage of the complementary strengths of these two
approaches. Operation ARIES introduced agent trialogs, where the human student
was situated in a three-party conversation between a second agent student and a teacher
agent (Millis et al. 2011). This design supports a mixture of vicarious learning and
interactive tutoring, allowing the system to combine the benefits of both. Several types
of interaction are possible. For students who are having trouble with the material,
vicarious learning is suitable, but the human is drawn in periodically by asking them to
answer simple yes/no verification questions. For students who have deep mastery of the
material, it is appropriate to have teachable-agent designs, with the human student
teaching the simulated student, detecting errors in their reasoning, and resolving
conflicting opinions between the two agents (Lehman et al. 2013). This design was
particularly beneficial for tutoring critical thinking in ARIES, allowing different agents
to represent information sources that disagree. Studies indicate that interactive trialogs
significantly improve scientific reasoning beyond no-dialog vicarious sessions (Kopp
et al. 2012).
Navigational Agents in Hypermedia
One line of research explored the question of whether conversational agents are
effective guides to help learners find and utilize learning resources, HURAA (Human
Use Regulatory Affairs Advisor) was a web-based tutor for training ethics in human
subjects research, with a curriculum based on United States Federal agency regulations
(Hu and Graesser 2004). HURAA was integrated with a learning management system
that included hypertext, multimedia, help links, glossaries, links to external sites, casebased reasoning lesson modules, and a conventional e-text presentation of material.
AutoTutor’s conversational capabilities were applied in ways that differed from other
systems. Firstly, the conversational agent was used as a guide to help users navigate the
system rather than collaboratively answering deep reasoning questions. Secondly, a
question and answer system called Point & Query supported asking questions by means
of a context-sensitive dropdown list of relevant questions (Langston and Graesser
1993). Finally, semantic analysis supported users’ natural language queries for help
on a particular topic.
Evaluations of HURAA reported that users had significantly higher free recall
(1.19σ), cued recall (0.56σ), cloze recall (0.58σ), and accuracy for retrieving relevant
documents (0.67σ), when compared to controls who used a conventional hypermedia
and e-text presentation of the same material (Hu and Graesser 2004). However,
HURAA did not change the ability of users to diagnose problematic issues in cases,
indicating that the case-based lesson modules were not significantly more effective than
simply reading an expert opinion on the case (the control condition). Additionally, a
second study reported that using the agent as a navigational guide did not significantly
improve any of these measures, nor did it change the users’ impressions of the system
significantly (Graesser et al. 2003c). As noted earlier, the SEEK agents were also not
helpful in improving navigation in a hypermedia system on plate tectonics. In both
systems, emphasis was placed on answering students’ questions and information

448

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

retrieval rather than the agent posing deep reasoning questions and collaboratively
answering the questions. Given the poor performance of navigational agents in both
SEEK and HURAA, this suggests that animated agents may not offer much advantage
during information search and retrieval tasks when compared to more traditional text
interfaces. Perhaps navigational guides may be more effective when the learner is very
lost or frustrated and needs guidance, but this needs further investigation.
Integrating Agents into Virtual Worlds
A more recent question has explored the potential benefit of enhancing virtual learning
practice environments with deep reasoning questions. VCAEST (Virtual Civilian
Aeromedical Evacuation Sustainment Training) trains civilian medical personnel on
federal guidelines for triage in emergency situations, particularly those where military
aircraft will be used to evacuate victims of an emergency, such as a natural disaster or
mass-casualty attack (Shubeck et al. 2012). VCAEST uses AutoTutor Lite, which will
be introduced shortly, to work with trainees within a 3D virtual world. This world
includes a tutoring agent and an ensemble of in-game non-player character agents,
some of whom represent injured individuals who must be stabilized and evacuated. The
project represents a mixture of direct intelligent tutoring with an interactive environment populated with task-relevant agents. In VCAEST, natural language tutoring
dialogs “pop up” and ask questions about virtual world events (e.g., bad triage
decisions). Virtual world events that launch tutoring dialogs is an interesting approach
to integrating discourse with authentic scenarios of social action. However, it is
pedagogically unclear when to interrupt the simulation with these dialogs and how to
manage tutoring if multiple learners are in the world. The VCAEST project is ongoing,
so the effectiveness of learning in this tutoring-enhanced virtual world is still being
evaluated.
Complementary Media: Simulations and Concept Maps
AutoTutor and related systems have added value by complementing the tutoring agents
with various types of media, ranging from simple images up to simulations. AutoTutor3D used three-dimensional simulations to help students represent the physics problems
they were working on (Graesser et al. 2005a). That is, AutoTutor used an interactive
simulation showing the objects and their spatial orientation within the problem. 3D
representations and simulations were added because they were believed to promote
deeper understanding of physics. In addition to conversing with the AutoTutor agent,
students were able to modify parameters of the simulation and launch the simulation to
display what will happen. During this process, the tutoring agent was able to request
that the students predict what would happen and ask them to compare what actually
happened in the simulation with their expectations. However, AutoTutor mainly posed
deep questions similar to WHY2/AutoTutor, rather providing simulation-specific scaffolding. An example of this interface is shown in Fig. 3.
Results revealed that most students made little use of the simulation features and had
trouble using them productively. There was only a 0.22σ gain for the AutoTutor-3D
condition over one with no 3D objects, which did not quite meet significance at p=0.05
(Jackson et al. 2006; Kim et al. 2005). The number of times students used the

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

449

Fig. 3 AutoTutor-3D Interface

simulations correlated with learning (r=.51, p<.01), but total usage was low and the
overall impact on students was modest. High performing students made greater use of
the simulations, however, and appeared to gain some benefit. These results confirmed
earlier findings that students have trouble using simulations productively and are
unable to systematically manipulate different combinations of parameters, observe
what happens, and record the results (Klahr 2002). Students clearly need more guidance to use simulations profitably. Agents might be designed to provide such guidance,
but would likely need to be integrated with the simulation more tightly than in
AutoTutor-3D.
GuruTutor (see Fig. 4) integrated secondary multimedia (e.g., graphics, video) more
tightly than many earlier members of the AutoTutor family of ITS (Olney et al. 2012).
The agent strategically points to elements in a display during the course of the tutoring.
Guru also uses concept maps to provide demonstrations and students interact with

Fig. 4 Guru Biology Tutor Interface

450

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

concept maps during exercises. While Nesbitt and Adesope’s (2006) meta-analysis
reported an effect size of 0.82σ for concept maps, the impact of concept maps in Guru
has been inconclusive. Time spent on concept maps and errors on concept map tasks
did not show reliable correlations with learning across two different topics (Person et al.
2012). This may be due to the types of content involved : time spent on an easier, more
fact-based concept map correlated with learning gains but there was no correlation
between time spent on concept maps for a second topic that was more difficult and
procedural (Person et al. 2012). As a comparison, Betty’s Brain showed consistent
learning gains using concept map tasks (Leelawong and Biswas 2008). However,
Betty’s Brain uses different content (maps of causal influences) and a different task
(teaching an agent with the map). Further research is needed to disentangle if Guru’s
concept map inconsistency is due to the concept map task or due to the type of
knowledge in the maps (e.g., links being remembered most saliently; Cade et al. 2014).

AutoTutor Technologies: Semantic Analysis, Authoring, and Delivery
AutoTutor research has also developed advanced capabilities for semantic analysis,
authoring, and tutoring delivery platforms. Semantic analysis research has been driven
by tutoring systems (AutoTutor, iSTART, DeepTutor) and by semantic analysis tools
(QUAID, Coh-Metrix, SEMILAR). AutoTutor’s authoring tools (ASAT) are also
discussed, including a discussion of emerging authoring tool designs. Finally, delivery
platforms are considered, such as web-based tutors (AutoTutor Lite, BCRA-Gist),
service-oriented architectures (AutoTutor Web Services, Sharable Knowledge Objects),
and open-source releases (GnuTutor).
Semantic Analysis and Natural Language Processing
Semantic analysis is a central technology behind any natural language tutoring system.
Early dialog-based tutors were extremely constrained in their ability to understand
natural language. The SCHOLAR tutor, noted previously, had very limited language
understanding and could get very little out of wrong or off-topic answers (Carbonell
1970). CIRCSIM was one of the first successful natural language tutoring systems and
was designed to teach blood pressure regulation to complement a simulation-based
environment for cardiology experimentation (Kim et al. 1989). CIRCSIM relied on a
domain-specific and hand-made lexicon that mapped to statements about ontology
objects, such as “Heart rate is increasing” (Glass 1997). This system did not have much
flexibility for transitioning to new domains, primarily due to the approaches used to
handle natural language. SOPHIE, a tutoring system for circuit design, used a more
powerful technique based on semantic grammars, but developing semantic grammars
remains a challenge (Burton 1977; Gavaldà and Waibel 1998).
In many ways, AutoTutor represents a synthesis of studies on naturalistic human
tutoring with technologies in computational linguistics, such as latent semantic analysis
(Graesser et al. 2007b) and Coh-Metrix (Graesser et al. 2004b). AutoTutor relies on
lexicons, part-of-speech classifiers, speech act classifiers, syntactic parsers, regular
expressions, templates, corpora, LSA, and other semantic analysis tools (Graesser
et al. 2012a, b). This multi-faceted approach is shared by other contemporary natural

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

451

language ITS families, which often have one central natural language understanding
technology supported by complementary methods. For example, the BEETLE II tutor
for circuit design combines semantic grammars with lexical databases (e.g., WordNet),
reference resolution algorithms, and statistical classifications (Dzikovska et al. 2013).
For AutoTutor, LSA has played a central role because it offers a robust semantic
matching algorithm that compares the student’s verbal input to AutoTutor’s expectations and anticipated misconceptions. The most common semantic matching algorithm
currently used by AutoTutor combines LSA, regular expressions, and frequency
weighted content word overlap (Cai et al. 2011). Syntactic parsing does not help much
in the pattern matching operations because much of the students’ verbal input is
ungrammatical. However, statistical syntactic parsers are useful for classifying the
student contributions into speech act categories. Clearly, AutoTutor must respond
differently to speech acts that are assertions versus questions, expressive evaluations,
acknowledgements (“okay”), metacognitive expressions (“I’m lost,” “I don’t know”).
LSA supports natural language processing by using a statistical technique called
singular-value decomposition to represent each word by a vector of component semantic statistical dimensions (factors). These component factors are generated by processing a large corpus of millions of words, in tens of thousands of documents, with
typically 100–500 such dimensions being generated (Landauer et al. 1998). This
process uses a bag-of-words model that captures co-occurrence information while
ignoring ordering. In essence, LSA captures what words co-occur with other words
in naturalistic documents, such as encyclopedias, but not in rigid dictionaries. A
domain-specific LSA dimensional model can be created based on word cooccurrence within a specific domain corpus. To compare a student contribution against
an anticipated contribution (expectation or misconception), each word is replaced by its
dimensional equivalent. All of the dimensions of the words within the contribution are
aggregated (typically summed) into a single dimensional vector. The similarity between
the actual and anticipated (e.g., ideal) vectors are then calculated, such as by calculating
the cosine between the vectors to generate a number ranging from 0 (no match) to 1
(perfect match).
LSA provides a quick technique for evaluating the quality of student contributions,
with studies indicating that AutoTutor’s evaluations of student contributions performed
comparably to intermediate domain experts (Graesser et al. 2000). LSA (and similar
approaches) also allow AutoTutor to transition effectively to new domains by training
on new corpora and developing semantic pattern matching assessments for new
expectations and misconceptions. This does not mean that tutoring a new domain is
always accurate, but LSA allows a high degree of automation compared to hand-crafted
semantic grammars and parser-based approaches.
The LSA semantic space for the original AutoTutor for computer literacy was
generated from two textbooks on the topic, 30 articles, and the curriculum script
(Graesser et al. 1999). Before testing the system for instructional purposes, the ability
of AutoTutor to evaluate student responses was tested on a sample of 192 answers to
questions in the curriculum script. This test revealed a correlation of 0.49 between the
LSA evaluations and the average evaluations of four human experts, two with intermediate expertise and two with advanced expertise (Graesser et al. 1999). By comparison, the correlation between the ratings of the intermediate experts (graduate students)
was 0.51 and the correlation between the ratings among advanced experts (graduate

452

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

degree holders active in the topic) was 0.78. As such, the LSA scoring performed
comparably with the intermediate experts, who are representative of typical tutors.
Early versions of AutoTutor produced solid learning gains, but evaluating student
contributions had room for improvement. Expert ratings of the quality for student
statements using AutoTutor for Physics were less robust than those for computer
literacy, with expert correlations reported as r=0.29 correlation with LSA, r=0.25 with
Kendall’s Tau (word ordering), r=0.39 word overlap (words shared between expectation and statement), and r=0.42 when all three were combined (Graesser et al. 2007b;
Rus and Graesser 2006). LSA has clear limitations due to ignoring sentence syntax and
ordering: it cannot handle negations (“correct” vs. “not correct”) or resolve terms using
context (e.g., “He ran” vs. “Charlie ran”). To overcome these issues, AutoTutor has
relied on regular expressions to find word overlap and detect necessary compound
structures (Cai et al. 2011, 2012). This yields semantic match scores with a reliability of
0.67 whereas trained humans agree 0.69. More advanced aggregation techniques across
words are also possible, such as inverse frequency weighting and contextual weighting
(e.g., negations changing the weights for terms). However, this process increases
authoring effort and the reliability of the performance is sometimes expectation-specific. Physics hits these problems more than computer literacy, because physics relationships are more abstract (e.g., “x has twice the velocity of y” vs. “The CPU reads
instructions from RAM”). These challenges have spurred development of more advanced tools.
Rus et al. (2008) improved on AutoTutor’s semantic analysis techniques by detecting textual entailment. Textual entailment of “X entails Y” holds true when “If a human
read X, they would probably infer that Y is true.” Entailment uses subsumption
relationships (e.g., “Y is a type of X”) to determine if the student’s statement is a more
general version of the expectation. This was executed in real-time by parsing statements
into graphs and applying subsumption hierarchically to determine if the entities and
relationships from the expectation were present in the student statement (i.e., same
terms, synonyms from thesaurus, more general terms). This approach offered an
improvement over word-overlap, LSA, and some similar word-to-word entailment
measures (Rus et al. 2008, 2009). Detecting entailment and paraphrasing (mutual
entailment) was used by iSTART and early versions of DeepTutor (Rus et al. 2009,
2013c).
A number of standalone semantic analysis packages have evolved in tandem with
the AutoTutor family. QUAID (Question Understanding Aid) was developed to evaluate the comprehensibility of questions to check if surveys are likely to provide useful
results (Graesser et al. 2006). Later, the Coh-Metrix was designed to support over 200
measures of text cohesion, language, and readability (Graesser et al. 2004b; McNamara
et al. 2014). Coh-Metrix (www.cohmetrix.com) is a free web-based service intended to
analyze passages of text, with a focus on ease versus difficulty of comprehension. CohMetrix has been used to analyze AutoTutor conversations (Graesser et al. 2007a) and
emotions during tutoring (D’Mello and Graesser 2012a). A recent development is the
SEMILAR (SEMantic SimILARity) toolkit, which implements a variety of word-toword similarity measures, classifiers, and entailment algorithms related to the
DeepTutor project (Rus et al. 2013b). A notable algorithm in SEMILAR is DeepTutor’s
Quadratic Assignment for optimal word-to-word matching, which outperformed all
other reported algorithms (77.6 % accuracy; Rus et al. 2013c) on text-to-text similarity

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

453

measures for sentences in the Microsoft Research Paraphrase corpus (Dolan et al.
2004). The algorithms in SEMILAR are described in Rus et al. (2013b).
Authoring Tools
The primary authoring tool for AutoTutor is ASAT (AutoTutor Script Authoring Tool),
also called ASAT-D (Desktop), whose initial design was outlined by Susarla et al.
(2003) but has been substantially revised to the point of being licensed for numerous
applications. The new version of this tool streamlines authoring and supports better
integration of media (e.g., graphics) and testing of AutoTutor’s scripts and conversational rules. Authoring tools are crucial for scaling up intelligent tutoring systems and
other advanced learning environments. Domain knowledge is essential for tutoring but
domain experts are unlikely to have the technical skills or time to learn complicated
interfaces or programming functionality. Time costs of authoring for ITS can be
particularly high, with some systems estimating approximately 100 or more hours of
authoring time for a single hour of instruction (Koedinger et al. 2004). With ASAT,
users with limited technical expertise can author a tutoring script in under 1 h (Song
et al. 2004). This is made possible because, unlike tutors that rely on programming or
special data representations, authoring AutoTutor scripts primarily involves writing (in
natural language) questions, expectations, misconceptions, hints, prompts, summaries,
and other verbal content. Nevertheless, technical expertise is needed to handle regular
expressions, links to external media requiring adaptive interaction, rule sets for conversations with adaptive complexity, and complex branching.
Significant room for improvement remains for improving three functions of
authoring tools: collaborative authoring, reducing the learning curve, and simplifying
dialog rule authoring. First, while scripts (“tutoring packs”) are modular, ASAT-D has
no way for multiple authors to collaboratively author different parts of the same script.
Ongoing work with the Sharable Knowledge Objects (SKO) project, described next, is
exploring the feasibility of web-based collaborative authoring with ASAT-W (WebBased), which uses cloud hosting and basic version control (e.g., similar to a Google
document). Second, while ASAT-D no explicit programming, learning to use the tool
effectively still involves a learning curve related to implicit understanding of programming concepts (e.g., conditions and rules). For in-service teachers and curriculum
designers, time-costs can be nontrivial, so a form-based tool called ASAT-FB (FormBased) is under development to provide a wizard design to streamline this process.
Finally, to simplify rule authoring, development of a visual flow-chart authoring
interface is under development as ASAT-V (Visual).
Delivery Technologies and Architectures
Delivery technologies are also very important for AutoTutor and ITS in general.
While intelligent tutoring systems are effective teaching tools (Graesser et al.
2012a; VanLehn 2011), wide scale adoption remains a serious challenge for
tutoring systems. AutoTutor has steadily worked toward minimizing the technical
requirements for end-users of the system, with initial designs relying on installed
software, later designs moving to web-based Java applications, and more recent
designs using a mixture of HTML and Flash.

454

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

AutoTutor Lite implements a constrained version of AutoTutor that is designed for
easier authoring (ASAT-W), rapid web deployment, and integration into third-party
systems such as games (www.skoonline.org; Hu et al. 2009). This version of AutoTutor
does not employ the full range of semantic analysis methods, but is limited to LSA and
keyword-based analysis. AutoTutor Lite does not have all of the dialog flexibility of
AutoTutor, but its main dialog style still uses deep reasoning questions complemented
by simpler self-reflection questions and vicarious tutoring. AutoTutor Lite uses a
simplified student model called Learner’s Characteristic Curves (LCC) that is based
on the relevance and novelty of student contributions (Morrison et al. 2014). Relevance, as with the original AutoTutor, is the similarity between the student’s contribution and the expectations. Novelty captures how different the student’s contribution is
from their prior contributions toward that topic, i.e., are they covering new ground or
rehashing old points? These factors trigger discourse moves such as hints, to determine
when to move on to new topics, and to select new questions. These restrictions help
AutoTutor scale as a web application and also simplify authoring.
Evaluations of learning gains for systems using AutoTutor Lite are underway, as it is
being used for the VCAEST military medical training and BRCA-Gist, a tutor for
assessing breast cancer risk. The content for BRCA-Gist was authored by researchers at
Miami University, making it one of the first AutoTutor descendants authored outside of
Memphis. A recent study using BCRA-Gist reported that the AutoTutor Lite’s evaluations of student contributions predicted student outcomes on a posttest (Wolfe et al.
2013). A second study indicated that AutoTutor Lite outperformed a static web-based
tutorial for reducing internal inconsistency (e.g., negating prior assumptions) but did
not improve quantitative estimates of risk probabilities (Wolfe et al. 2012).
Three additional projects have also attempted to make AutoTutor more accessible.
The first such project, GnuTutor, was a Java open-source release with elements of
AutoTutor and AutoTutor Lite (Olney 2009). GnuTutor was intended for third-party
developers who wish to inspect or build on the system. AutoTutor and AutoTutor Lite
development has continued since this time so an updated release of GnuTutor is needed
in the future. Second, recent versions of AutoTutor have been exposed as the AutoTutor
Web Services (ATWS), to improve interoperability with other systems. For example,
the University of Wisconsin’s Land Science multiparty game helps groups of middle
school students learn about urban science in their community (Shaffer 2006; Shaffer
and Graesser 2010). The group learning environment has an automated AutoMentor
with some of the components of AutoTutor, with the tutoring agent’s behaviors
modeled after the behaviors of human mentors for students using the system (Shaffer
and Graesser 2010). The goal is for students to think and act like STEM professionals, but they can only do this with the guidance of either a human mentor
(Shaffer 2006) or an AutoMentor. AutoMentor gives each student group suggestions and responds to some of their questions by either answering the questions
directly or asking other students to respond to the questions, then assessing the
semantic relevance of the replies. Web services help AutoMentor integrate into this
multiplayer serious game.
Third, the Sharable Knowledge Objects (SKO) Module system is an ongoing project
that can extend AutoTutor or AutoTutor Lite. SKO modules are designed using webbased and service-oriented patterns, allowing each SKO to be an encapsulated tutoring
unit that composes local and remote services (Nye 2013). Each SKO is capable of

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

455

conversation using one or more high-quality agent avatars, text, graphics, movies,
sound files, and embedded web resources. The SKO project moves AutoTutor toward
a service-oriented design that increases the modularity of tutor designs. This should
improve integration into learning management systems and other service-oriented
systems, such as the Generalized Intelligent Framework for Tutoring architecture
(GIFT; Sottilare et al. 2012). As part of this system, a persistent student model service
is being developed to track and report student knowledge levels.
The SKO framework is currently being used to approach Algebra I mathematics,
which is a new domain for AutoTutor. This system is being integrated to provide justin-time tutoring for ALEKS (Assessment and Learning in Knowledge Spaces), an
adaptive learning system based on knowledge space theory (Falmagne et al. 2006).
Each relevant ALEKS problem will be supported by AutoTutor trialogs (three-way
conversations between the user, the tutor, and a simulated student). Algebra is more
procedural than many topics approached by AutoTutor in the past, making this a
qualitatively different domain. A major goal of the SKO project is to develop a tutoring
architecture that can be integrated with existing content (e.g., adding tutoring to
existing HTML pages) and platforms (e.g., ALEKS). SKO focuses on integrating with
pre-existing content because the cost to develop new content is a common bottleneck
for ITS. While this system is currently being used to produce standalone modules for
delivery inside other systems, the framework supports real-time semantic messaging to
integrate into dynamic systems (e.g., simulations). By making it easier to enhance
existing resources with tutoring, it should be possible to make tutoring systems
available to a greater number of learners.

Discussion: Key Findings from AutoTutor
Overall, AutoTutor and related systems have shown learning gains over non-interactive
learning materials on a variety of math and science domains: computer literacy, physics,
biology, and critical thinking. Average learning gains were approximately 0.8σ
(Graesser et al. 2012b, 2008), typically with higher gains for deep learning than
shallow. On the one hand, these show an impressive effectiveness as an instructional
tool. On the other hand, learning gains fall significantly short of Bloom’s (1986) report
of 2σ for expert human tutoring and no study reported learning gains in excess of 1.5σ
over controls. These results can be interpreted in two ways: either it is extremely hard to
match the performance of human tutoring or human tutors are not actually as good as
Bloom estimated. Meta-analyses by Cohen et al. (1982) and VanLehn (2011) reported
effect sizes of only 0.4σ and 0.79σ for human tutoring, respectively. Studies with gains
over 0.8σ tended to be short (<4 weeks) and structured interventions. Learning gains of
2σ might only be possible for special subsets of domain content or extremely effective
tutors. With that in mind, AutoTutor is probably more effective than many non-expert
tutors and might even be on-par with a typical expert tutor.
The particular mechanisms of such learning gains in AutoTutor-style tutoring have
been examined in some studies, but additional work is needed to disentangle the
components that are responsible for learning. Studies have examined the effect of
disabling or altering specific tutor functions, but it is infeasible to empirically test
every combination of tutoring features. Table 4 shows the relative difference in learning

456

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

Table 4 Changes in learning gains under different conditions
Description

Δ Learning

Study

AutoTutor Base System

0.80σ

(Average of many)

Text only (No avatar + no voice synthesizer)

−0.13σ1

Voice only (No avatar)

−0.13σ1

Graesser et al. (2004a);
Graesser et al. (2008)

AutoTutor with Redundant Text + Voice

+0.34σ1

Human spoken input (instead of typed text)

~

D’Mello et al. (2011a, b)

Human reads relevant book sections that
answers a question(non-interactive)

−0.22σ

Graesser et al. (2004a)

Human reads tutoring scripts directly relevant
to the main question (non-interactive)

−0.07σ

Tutoring by an expert tutor over text chat

−0.08σ

Vicarious learning (watch tutoring only)
3D Simulations (Physics)
1

~
+0.22σ1

Gholson et al. (2009)
Graesser et al. (2005a, b)

Not statistically significant

gains when certain features were disabled or altered, with the relevant study results
cited. A tilde mark (“~”) means that the study found this design reported no statistically
significant difference in learning gains from the base AutoTutor system, nor any
consistent effect direction. The base system for AutoTutor uses text input from the
human and a talking head avatar that uses synthesized speech. This table demonstrates,
in part, the difficulty in obtaining statistically significant effects when changing individual features, even when using reasonable sample sizes (25–40 subjects per
condition).
The only consistent and reliable differences are seen when comparing AutoTutor
against different types of content, such as reading static text or reading the tutoring
scripts. These findings indicate that engaging with appropriate, relevant content dominates other factors such as modality and sometimes even interactivity. However, the
issue of information equivalence complicates these evaluations: textbooks seldom
include deep reasoning questions, so curriculum designers must generate them for
AutoTutor. While the similarity between control text and tutoring scripts is high (e.g.,
LSA cosine similarity=0.58; VanLehn et al. 2007), they are not identical. This issue is
systemic: textbooks do not pose deep reasoning questions because they cannot provide
feedback and because their rhetorical structure is not organized around deep questions
and answers. This may offer a “format advantage” for dynamic media over textbooks,
because ITS can present content (e.g., questions) that would not make sense in a
textbook.
The small difference (−0.07σ) between AutoTutor versus reading the tutoring scripts
belies the importance of adapting to the student. A study of WHY2/Atlas and WHY2/
AutoTutor (VanLehn et al. 2007) controlled for content by comparing the human tutors,
tutoring systems, canned text (static tutoring script content), and textbooks. They found
that human tutors strongly outperformed canned scripts (1.64σ) when novices encountered intermediate content (e.g., content in their zone of proximal development).
Ceiling and floor effects were highly evident outside of the zone of proximal

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

457

development. When students had very high knowledge, tutors (human or computer)
performed no better than canned statements. Likewise, when students totally lacked the
requisite background knowledge, they performed poorly regardless of the condition
(VanLehn et al. 2007). This demonstrates how prior knowledge can confound effect
sizes as a measure of effectiveness and might also hinder testing of featureeffectiveness.
Prior achievement can also impact the effectiveness of features directly. Table 5
notes specific dialog strategies and pedagogical agent roles that have significant
evidence of being effective (+) versus not significantly effective (~) for learning. In
this table, the first six rows (AutoTutor to ARIES) represent unique systems compared
against traditional controls as discussed earlier in the paper (e.g., reading texts). The
final four rows (AutoTutor-AS to AutoTutor-3D) are modified versions of either
AutoTutor or Guru, so they are compared against their respective base system. These
findings hint at opportunities to detect student traits that allow tutor features to be more
effective, thereby improving personalization of learning. Work with AutoTutor-AS
revealed that only low knowledge students benefited from affect sensitivity (D’Mello
and Graesser 2012a; D’Mello et al. 2011b). This work mirrors findings with the
Wayang Output tutoring system, which found that low knowledge students benefit
more from affective support provided by animated agents (Woolf et al. 2010). Similar
results have been found for factors such as politeness of animated agents (Wang et al.
2008).
Vicarious dialogs (a tutor agent talking with a peer agent) have also been
more effective for low knowledge learners (Craig et al. 2012). While these
dialogs can still benefit high knowledge students, they show particular benefits
for helping low knowledge students build initial models for domain knowledge.
In this way, a vicarious dialog in natural language may be analogous to a
worked example for problem-solving. On the converse, interactive simulations
were used more productively by higher-performing learners, though increased
scaffolding might help other students benefit also (Jackson et al. 2006). While
Table 5 Effectiveness of tutoring system features on different learners
Feature

First System w/ Feature

Learner Performance
High

Expectation-misconception tutoring dialog (5-frame)

AutoTutor

+

Deep reasoning questions

AutoTutor

+

Collaborative lectures

Guru

+

Navigational agent (search help)

HURAA

~

Vicarious agent dialogs

iDRIVE

+

Trialogs (tutor + peer agent)

ARIES

+

Affective sensitivity

AutoTutor-AS (Supportive)

~

Informal interaction

AutoTutor-AS (Shakeup)

~

Reacting to disengaged eye contact

Gaze Tutor (Built on Guru)

+

Interactive simulations

AutoTutor-3D

+

Low

++
+

~

458

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

it is not noted in the table because conclusive evidence is not yet available, it
is hypothesized that teachable agents will be most beneficial for highknowledge learners. This is because teachable agents require the highest levels
of learner contributions, since the human student leads the explanation.
Other strategies and features appear effective (or ineffective) for a variety of
learners. Expectation-misconception tailored dialogs and deep reasoning questions have been effective for a variety of systems and domains (Graesser et al.
2012b). Guru demonstrated that collaborative lectures are consistently effective
(Olney et al. 2012). Reacting to disengagement in GazeTutor was also found to
improve deep learning (D’Mello, Olney et al. 2012). Pedagogical agents have
also failed in particular roles. For example, the HURAA and SEEK systems
indicated that intelligent agents may not add much value as navigators in a
hypermedia system (Hu and Graesser 2004). Similarly, the buddy-style
AutoTutor-AS Shakeup tutor was less effective than the more traditional Supportive AutoTutor (D’Mello, Lehman, & Graesser 2011). Students’ liking of an
AutoTutor agent also had no correlation with learning as reported by Moreno
et al. (2002), whereas Jackson and Graesser (2007) reported a negative relationship between conditions that promote liking versus deep learning. Studies
on vicarious learning have identified some conditions when the human does not
even need to be directly interacting with the tutor, but can learn fairly well by
watching a simulated student learn (Gholson et al. 2009; Chi et al. 2008). In
total, this suggests that pedagogical agents do not need to be navigators or
buddies to the learner, nor even liked by the learner. It also indicates that they
do not always need to be tutors to the student, but can teach indirectly instead.
Other work suggests that while optimizing microsteps can improve learning gains
(Chi et al. 2014), ITS may over-emphasize high levels of interactivity at the micro-step
level (VanLehn 2011). Simply stated, the best dialog is not always the most interactive
one. This point is supported by Kopp et al.’s (2012) finding on the dosage of interactive
tutoring. They reported significant learning gains (0.46σ) for mixing intense dialog on
some problems and no dialog in others when compared to a system that used intense
dialog exclusively. Trialog-based environments like Operation ARIES/ARA allow
great flexibility in tutoring exchanges to explore the tradeoffs of mixing direct tutoring,
vicarious tutoring, teachable agents, and traditional media (Forsyth et al. 2012; Halpern
et al. 2012; Millis et al. 2011).
It is possible that the optimal level of interactivity depends on the students’
knowledge level. Table 5 hints at a trend where low-knowledge students benefit
most from low control over the interaction (e.g., vicarious) and high-knowledge
students benefit from high control over the interaction (e.g., simulations). If this
trend holds true, we would expect a positive correlation between knowledge
level and the benefits from interactivity, such as: Vicarious (lowest knowledge)
→ Collaborative Lectures → Deep Questions and Expectation-Misconception
Dialog → Teachable Agents → Simulations (highest knowledge). While this
pattern intuitively makes sense, many of these strategies have not been directly
compared, so further research is needed to see if this holds empirically. Moving
forward, new roles and arrangements for ensembles of pedagogical agents
should continue to enhance the quality of tutoring systems by allowing researchers to analyze and compare different tutoring strategies.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

459

Future Directions
This review of AutoTutor’s history demonstrates that conversational tutoring systems
can help students with a variety of domains and subject matter. In many ways, the
success of conversational tutors across many subjects validates a core idea behind
AutoTutor: that the conversational agent offers a universal interface for tutoring that
can implement a variety of pedagogical strategies. Assuming that natural language
tutoring can be universal, can it become ubiquitous? The evolution of AutoTutor shows
a gradual shift in this direction. The initial AutoTutor design was a standalone desktop
application, but is becoming available as standards-based web services. The AutoTutor
family has integrated increasingly rich and diverse media into their tutoring environments, including simulations, interactive concept maps, and videos. In some recent
projects, the roles of AutoTutor agents and complementary media have reversed:
tutoring agents are being embedded into static media (e.g., HTML pages) and dynamic
media (e.g., virtual worlds). Considering conversational agents as a universal interface,
this inversion offers powerful opportunities for embedding tutoring agents into the
wealth of existing digital educational media and learning systems. Conversational
interfaces are also uniquely suited for mobile learning. For example, natural language
tutors could be effective as situated tutors, such as mobile learning tutors that are
triggered by GPS hotspots (Hwang and Tsai 2011).
Despite clearing technological hurdles, transferring tutoring systems into schools
and commercial use has proved difficult for the ITS field in general. Learning gains are
only one of many considerations for teachers and administrators, making it harder to
get ITS into the hands of students. While thousands of learners have used AutoTutor,
there has been little sustained use by K-12 schools. However, AutoTutor and related
systems have recently made promising footholds. Projects such as Guru and DeepTutor
were each recently evaluated by over 200 students in K-12 classrooms, and have
potential for broader use. The CSAL project for adult literacy will reach 500 adult
learners during its evaluation and could make a large impact as a web service, since
nearly 3 million Americans enroll in adult literacy programs annually. Partnerships with
commercial groups are also growing. A specialized version of ASAT for Assessment
(ASATA) is being developed with the Educational Testing Service (ETS).
Operation ARA is being expanded with Pearson for use as a serious game.
Finally, SKO modules for Algebra are being integrated with ALEKS, a commercial learning system with McGraw-Hill that has served millions of students
over more than a decade. AutoTutor is also integrated into the Generalized
Framework for Intelligent Tutoring (GIFT) architecture, a major Army Research
Lab project working to build the next generation of tutoring standards and
authoring (Sottilare et al. 2012).
Getting tutoring systems into the hands of learners is particularly important because
there is little doubt that tutoring systems are effective. Studies indicate that tutoring
systems may have surpassed non-expert tutors and might even match expert human
tutors on some topics (Graesser et al. 2012a; VanLehn 2011). This leads to an important
question about the future of tutoring systems: what if human tutors were not as effective
as we previously thought? Should tutoring systems attempt to model more effective
human tutors (e.g., Guru Tutor)? Alternatively, should ITS attempt to take advantage of
optimized micro-steps or idealized progressions that human tutors would have

460

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

difficulty implementing? Finally, how tutoring systems be optimized to promote greater
use by students and classes (e.g., SKO Modules)? There are good reasons to pursue
each of these research agendas, as well as significant questions about which types of
students benefit most from certain tutoring features. As research based on AutoTutor
continues, new projects will continue to explore the principles that produce effective
and accessible learning.
Acknowledgments This work has been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (NSF
grants 0325428, 633918, 0834847, 0918409, 1108845, 0834847, 0904909, 0918409, 1108845), Institute of
Education Sciences (IES grants R305A080594, R305G020018, R305C120001, R305A090528,
R305A100875), Office of Naval Research (ONR STEM Grand Challenge: N00014-12-C-0643), Army
Research Lab (N00014-12-C-0643), and the Educational Testing Service. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of these funding sources.

Appendix 1: Glossary of Projects
ASAT: AutoTutor Script Authoring Tool is the primary authoring tool for AutoTutor.
Can direct multiple agents and external events/controls.
ASATA: AutoTutor Script Authoring Tool for Assessment is a specialized authoring
tool developed with the Educational Testing Service for developing for building dialog-based high stakes assessments.
AutoMentor (STEM Thinking): Uses epistemic analysis of discourse in student group
chats to help students learn how to think and act like STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) professionals in a multi-party serious game
simulation of urban planning.
AutoTutor (Computer Literacy): Core AutoTutor natural language tutoring system,
which uses expectation-misconception dialog and deep questions, latent
semantic analysis & regular expressions, and talks with user through the
animated agent(s).
AutoTutor-3D (Physics): An extension of AutoTutor for physics, AutoTutor-3D
added interactive three dimensional simulations of physics problems designed
in 3D Studio Max.
AutoTutor Affect-Sensitive (Computer Literacy): AutoTutor-AS detected affect
using natural language and discourse, facial expressions, body posture, and
speech. Feedback considered student emotions and cognitive states. Sometimes
called AutoTutor-ES (Emotion Sensitive).
AutoTutor Lite (General): AutoTutor Lite (ATL) is a web-based variant of AutoTutor
designed for simpler authoring, rapid deployment, and integration into thirdparty systems.
BRCA-Gist (Breast Cancer Risk): An AutoTutor Lite tutor led by the Miami University, intended to tutor understanding of risk probabilities and personal breast
cancer risk.
Coh-Metrix: A linguistic analysis toolkit with over 200 metrics. The “Coh” stands for
cohesion and coherence.
CSAL Adult Literacy Tutor (Reading): This tutoring system project for the Center
for the Study of Adult Literacy (CSAL) is intended to help learners who

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

461

struggle with print media, through closer integration of trialogs, web pages, and
multimedia.
DeepTutor (Physics): Tutor that uses learning progressions to foster deep learning of
physics concepts, as well as enhanced semantic analysis, such as entailment.
GazeTutor (Biology): Enhanced version of Guru Tutor that monitors and reacts to
student gaze.
Gnu Tutor (General): An open source Java release of an early version AutoTutor Lite.
Guru Tutor (Biology): Tutoring system for biology designed based on observation of
expert tutors. Uses collaborative lecturing and concept maps to support
learning.
HURAA (Research Ethics): The Human Use Regulatory Affairs Advisor for training
ethics in human experiments. AutoTutor agents helped navigate hypertext
multimedia containing case-based reasoning and multiple information retrieval
mechanisms.
iDRIVE (Computer Literacy, Physics, Biology): Instruction with Deep-Level Reasoning Questions in Vicarious Environments where the learner observes two
pedagogical agents demonstrate deep explanations and model effective learning behavior (e.g. question-asking).
iSTART (Reading): Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking is a
tutoring system for improving reading comprehension by training reading
strategies. Uses multi-agent conversations and specialized semantic analysis
to tutor reading strategies.
iSTART-ME (Reading): The Motivationally-Enhanced (ME) version of iSTART
provides tutoring using an interactive game environment.
MetaTutor (Biology): Tutors self-regulated learning (SRL) skills inside a hypermedia
setting.
Operation ARA (Scientific Reasoning): Operation Acquiring Research Acumen is an
extension of the Operation ARIES project that adds additional features and
game content.
Operation ARIES (Scientific Reasoning): Operation Acquiring Research, Investigative, and Evaluative Skills is a trialog-based tutoring system and serious game
for teaching critical thinking. Learners resolve inconsistent information about
scientific methods inside a serious game narrative.
QUAID: Question Understanding Aid was a tool to evaluate the comprehensibility of
questions.
SEEK Web Tutor (Critical Thinking): The Source, Evidence, Explanation, and
Knowledge Tutor was designed to help learners evaluate the credibility and
relevance of information using tutoring-enhanced web search, with spoken
hints, pop-up ratings and metacognitive journaling.
SKO Modules (General): Sharable Knowledge Object Modules are encapsulated,
cloud-hosted modules that compose web services to provide tutoring. Currently
being applied to Algebra.
VCAEST (Medical): Virtual Civilian Aeromedical Evacuation Sustainment Training
is designed to train civilian medical personnel on federal guidelines for emergency situations and triage.
WHY2/AutoTutor (Physics): Extension of AutoTutor that approached tutoring conceptual physics. This was part of a larger WHY2 project that included

462

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

WHY2/Atlas. WHY2 was a reference to an old tutoring system called WHY
and the year 2000 (e.g., Y2K).
Writing-Pal (Writing): This tutor attempts to improve essay and academic writing
skills and provides automated evaluation and feedback on essays. It is related to
the iSTART system.

Appendix 2
Table 6 Main tutoring discourse styles, by system
Systema

Deep
Question

Vicarious

Trialog
Stylesb

ARA/ARIES

X

X

X

AutoTutor

X

AutoTutor-3D

X

AutoTutor-AS

X

Collaborative
Lectures

Other

Xc

AutoTutor Lite

X

X

BRCA-Gist

X

X

CSAL

X

X

DeepTutor

X

Xd

X

GazeTutor
GnuTutor

Navigation &
Queries

X
X

GuruTutor

X

HURAA

X

iDRIVE

(X)e

MetaTutor

X

SEEK

X

SKO

X

VCAEST

X

WHY2/AutoTutor

X

X
X
X

Xf

X
X

X
X

a
iSTART, iSTART-ME, and Writing-Pal are not listed because their tutoring styles differ significantly from
other tutors, due to their focus on tutoring reading and writing skills
b

Multiple trialog styles exist, including teachable agents, trialog-based deep reasoning questions, and peer
competition quiz games such as those used by Operation ARIES. Not all trialog-capable systems use all
available modes in practice, but all are able to use them

c

AutoTutor-3D asked for predictions about simulations and responded to those predictions

d

CSAL uses click-based inputs, such as interactive graphics, to help improve literacy

e

iDRIVE presented deep questions asking and answering vicariously

f

MetaTutor had multiple agents that served distinct roles for fostering metacognition

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

463

References
Aleven, V., Mclaren, B. M., Sewall, J., & Koedinger, K. R. (2009). A new paradigm for intelligent tutoring
systems: example-tracing tutors. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 19(2), 105–
154.
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing. New York:
Longman.
Azevedo, R., Johnson, A., Chauncey, A., & Burkett, C. (2010). Self-regulated learning with MetaTutor:
Advancing the science of learning with MetaCognitive tools. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh (Eds.), New
science of learning (pp. 225–247). New York: Springer.
Azevedo, R., Landis, R. S., Feyzi-Behnagh, R., Duffy, M., Trevors, G., Harley, J. M., & Hossain, G. (2012).
The effectiveness of pedagogical agents’ prompting and feedback in facilitating co-adapted learning with
MetaTutor. In S. A. Cerri & B. Clancey (Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 2012
(pp. 212–221). Berlin: Springer.
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives, handbook I: The cognitive domain. New York:
David McKay Co, Inc.
Bloom, B. S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: the search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-toone tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6), 4–16.
Brophy, S., Biswas, G., Katzlberger, T., Bransford, J., & Schwartz, D. (1999). Teachable agents: Combining
insights from learning theory and computer science. In S. P. Lajoie & M. Vivet (Eds.), Proceedings of
Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) 1999 (pp. 21–28). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Burton, R. R. (1977). Semantic grammar: an engineering technique for constructing natural language
understanding systems. ACM SIGART Bulletin, 61, 26.
Cade, W. L., Maass, J. K., Hays, P., & Olney, A. M. (2014). Animated presentation of pictorial and concept
map media in biology. In Intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 416–425). Berlin: Springer.
Cai, Z., Forsyth, C., Germany, M. L., Graesser, A. C., & Millis, K. (2012). Accuracy of tracking student’s
natural language in OperationARIES!: A serious game for scientific methods. In S. A. Cerri & B. Clancey
(Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 2012 (pp. 629–630). Berlin: Springer.
Cai, Z., Graesser, A. C., Forsyth, C., Burkett, C., Millis, K., Wallace, P., Halpern, D., & Butler, H. (2011).
Trialog in ARIES: User input assessment in an intelligent tutoring system. In W. Chen & S. Li (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Intelligent Systems
(pp. 429–433). Guangzhou: IEEE Press.
Carbonell, J. R. (1970). AI in CAI: an artificial-intelligence approach to computer-assisted instruction. Man–
machine Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 11(4), 190–202.
Chi, M. T., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439–477.
Chi, M. T., Roy, M., & Hausmann, R. G. (2008). Observing tutorial dialogues collaboratively: insights about
human tutoring effectiveness from vicarious learning. Cognitive Science, 32(2), 301–341.
Chi, M., Jordan, P., & VanLehn, K. (2014). When is tutorial dialogue more effective than step-based tutoring?
In S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M. Crosby, & K. Panourgia (Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring
Systems (ITS) 2014. Berlin: Springer.
Cohen, P. A., Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C. L. C. (1982). Educational outcomes of tutoring: a meta-analysis of
findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19(2), 237–248.
Craig, S. D., Gholson, B., Brittingham, J. K., Williams, J. L., & Shubeck, K. T. (2012). Promoting
vicarious learning of physics using deep questions with explanations. Computers & Education,
58(4), 1042–1048.
Craig, S. D., Sullins, J., Witherspoon, A., & Gholson, B. (2006). The deep-level-reasoning-question effect: the
role of dialogue and deep-level-reasoning questions during vicarious learning. Cognition and Instruction,
24(4), 565–591.
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing
by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6),
391–407.
Dehn, D. M., & Van Mulken, S. (2000). The impact of animated interface agents: a review of empirical
research. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 52(1), 1–22.
Dillenbourg, P., & Traum, D. (2006). Sharing solutions: persistence and grounding in multi-modal collaborative problem solving. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15, 121–151.
D’Mello, S., Picard, R., & Graesser, A. (2007). Towards an affect-sensitive autotutor. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 22(4), 53–61.

464

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

D’Mello, S. K., Dowell, N., & Graesser, A. C. (2011a). Does it really matter whether students’ contributions
are spoken versus typed in an intelligent tutoring system with natural language? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 17(1), 1–17.
D’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. C. (2010). Multimodal semi-automated affect detection from conversational
cues, gross body language, and facial features. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 20, 147–
187.
D’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. C. (2012a). AutoTutor and affective AutoTutor: Learning by talking with
cognitively and emotionally intelligent computers that talk back. ACM Transactions on Interactive
Intelligent Systems, 2(4), 23:2–23:29.
D’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. C. (2012). Dynamics of affective states during complex learning. Learning and
Instruction, 22(2), 145–157.
D’Mello, S. K., Hays, P., Williams, C., Cade, W., Brown, J., & Olney, A. (2010a). Collaborative lecturing by
human and computer tutors. In V. Aleven, J. Kay, & J. Mostow (Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring
Systems (ITS) 2010 (pp. 178–187). Berlin: Springer.
D’Mello, S. K., Lehman, B., & Graesser, A. (2011b). A motivationally supportive affect-sensitive AutoTutor.
In R. Calvo & S. D’Mello (Eds.), New perspectives on affect and learning technologies (pp. 113–126).
New York: Springer.
D’Mello, S., Lehman, B., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. (2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning.
Learning and Instruction, 29, 153–170.
D’Mello, S. K., Olney, A., & Person, N. (2010b). Mining collaborative patterns in tutorial dialogues. Journal
of Educational Data Mining, 2(1), 1–37.
D’Mello, S., Olney, A., Williams, C., & Hays, P. (2012b). Gaze tutor: a gaze-reactive intelligent tutoring
system. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 70(5), 377–398.
Dolan, B., Quirk, C., & Brockett, C. (2004). Unsupervised construction of large paraphrase corpora:
Exploiting massively parallel news sources. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (p. 350–357). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dzikovska, M. O., Farrow, E., & Moore, J. D. (2013). In H. C. Lane, K. Yacef, J. Mostow, & P. Pavlik (Eds.),
Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) 2013 (pp. 279–288). Berlin: Springer.
Epstein, R., Roberts, G., & Beber, G. (2009). Parsing the Turing test: Philosophical and methodological
issues in the quest for the thinking computer. Berlin: Springer.
Falmagne, J. C., Cosyn, E., Doignon, J. P., & Thiéry, N. (2006). The assessment of knowledge, in
theory and in practice. In R. Missaoui & J. Schmidt (Eds.), Formal concept analysis (pp. 61–
79). Berlin: Springer.
Freedman, R., Haggin, N., Nacheva, D., Leahy, T., & Stilson, R. (2004). Using a domain-independent reactive
planner to implement a medical dialogue system. In T. Bickmore (Ed.), AAAI fall symposium on systems
for health communication (pp. 24–31). Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
Forsyth, C. M., Pavlik, P., Graesser, A. C., Cai, Z., Germany, M., Millis, K., Butler, H., & Dolan, R. (2012). In
K. Yacef, O. Zaïane, H. Hershkovitz, M. Yudelson, & J. Stamper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Educational Data Mining (pp. 172–175). Chania: International
Educational Data Mining Society.
Gholson, B., Witherspoon, A., Morgan, B., Brittingham, J. K., Coles, R., Graesser, A. C., & Craig, S. D.
(2009). Exploring the deep-level reasoning questions effect during vicarious learning among eighth to
eleventh graders in the domains of computer literacy and Newtonian physics. Instructional Science, 37(5),
487–493.
Glass, M. (1997). Some phenomena handled by the CIRCSIM-Tutor Version 3 input understander. In D.
Dankel (Ed.), Proceedings of the Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium (FLAIRS) 1997 (pp.
21–25). Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
Gavaldà, M., & Waibel, A. (1998). Growing semantic grammars. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and 17th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, 1 (pp. 451–456). New Brunswick: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Graesser, A. C. (2009). Inaugural editorial for Journal of Educational Psychology. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 101, 259–261.
Graesser, A. C. (2011). Learning, thinking, and emoting with discourse technologies. The American
Psychologist, 66(8), 743–757.
Graesser, A. C., Cai, Z., Louwerse, M., & Daniel, F. (2006). Question Understanding Aid (QUAID): a web
facility that helps survey methodologists improve the comprehensibility of questions. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 70, 3–22.
Graesser, A. C., Chipman, P., Haynes, B. C., & Olney, A. (2005a). AutoTutor: an intelligent tutoring system
with mixed-initiative dialogue. Education, IEEE Transactions on, 48(4), 612–618.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

465

Graesser, A. C., Conley, M. W., & Olney, A. M. (2012a). Intelligent tutoring systems. In S. Graham & K.
Harris (Eds.), APA Educational Psychology Handbook: Vol. 3. Applications to Learning and Teaching
(pp. 451–473). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Graesser, A. C., D’Mello, S. K., Hu, X., Cai, Z., Olney, A., & Morgan, B. (2012b). AutoTutor. In P. McCarthy
& C. Boonthum-Denecke (Eds.), Applied natural language processing: Identification, investigation, and
resolution (pp. 169–187). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Graesser, A. C., D’Mello, S., & Person, N. K. (2009). Metaknowledge in tutoring. In D. Hacker, J. Donlosky,
& A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Handbook of metacognition in education (pp. 361–382). New York: Taylor &
Francis.
Graesser, A. C., Jackson, G. T., Mathews, E. C., Mitchell, H. H., Olney, A., Ventura, M., & Tutoring Research
Group. (2003a). Why/AutoTutor: A test of learning gains from a physics tutor with natural language
dialog. In R. Alterman & D. Hirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the 25rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1–5). Boston: Cognitive Science Society.
Graesser, A. C., Jeon, M., & Dufty, D. (2008). Agent technologies designed to facilitate interactive knowledge
construction. Discourse Processes, 45(4–5), 298–322.
Graesser, A. C., Jeon, M., Yang, Y., & Cai, Z. (2007a). Discourse cohesion in text and tutorial dialogue.
Information Design Journal, 15, 199–213.
Graesser, A. C., Li, H., & Forsyth, C. (2014). Learning by communicating in natural language with
conversational agents. Current Directions in Psychological Science. In press.
Graesser, A. C., Lin, D., & D’Mello, S. (2010). Computer learning environments with agents that support deep
comprehension and collaborative reasoning. In M. Banich & D. Caccamise (Eds.), Generalization of
Knowledge: Multidisciplinary Perspectives (pp. 201–223). New York: Psychology Press.
Graesser, A. C., Lu, S., Jackson, G. T., Mitchell, H., Ventura, M., Olney, A., & Louwerse, M. M. (2004a).
AutoTutor: a tutor with dialogue in natural language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 36, 180–193.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai, Z. (2004b). Coh-Metrix: analysis of
text on cohesion and language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 36,
193–202.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., & VanLehn, K. (2005b). Scaffolding deep comprehension strategies
through Point & Query, AutoTutor, and iSTART. Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 225–234.
Graesser, A. C., Moreno, K., Marineau, J., Adcock, A., Olney, A., & Person, N. (2003b). AutoTutor improves
deep learning of computer literacy: Is it the dialog or the talking head? In U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo, & J. Kay
(Eds.), Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) 2003 (pp. 47–54). Amsterdam: IOS
Press.
Graesser, A. C., Penumatsa, P., Ventura, M., Cai, Z., & Hu, X. (2007b). Using LSA in AutoTutor:
Learning through mixed initiative dialogue in natural language. In T. Landauer, D. McNamara,
S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch (Eds.), Handbook of latent semantic analysis (pp. 243–262). Mahwah:
Erlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational Research
Journal, 31, 104–137.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. (1995). Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-toone tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 1–28.
Graesser, A. C., VanLehn, K., Rosé, C. P., Jordan, P. W., & Harter, D. (2001b). Intelligent tutoring systems
with conversational dialogue. AI Magazine, 22(4), 39–51.
Graesser, A.C., Ventura, M., Jackson, G.T., Mueller, J., Hu, X., & Person, N. (2003). The impact of
conversational navigational guides on the learning, use, and perceptions of users of a web site.
Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium 2003 on Agent-mediated Knowledge Management. Menlo
Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Graesser, A. C., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Wiemer-Hastings, P., & Kreuz, R. (1999). AutoTutor: a simulation of a
human tutor. Cognitive Systems Research, 1(1), 35–51.
Graesser, A. C., Wiemer-Hastings, P., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Harter, D., & Tutoring Research Group, &
Person, N. (2000). Using latent semantic analysis to evaluate the contributions of students in AutoTutor.
Interactive Learning Environments, 8(2), 129–147.
Graesser, A. C., Wiley, J., Goldman, S. R., O’Reilly, T., Jeon, M., & McDaniel, B. (2007c). SEEK Web tutor:
fostering a critical stance while exploring the causes of volcanic eruption. Metacognition and Learning, 2
(2–3), 89–105.
Halpern, D. F., Millis, K., Graesser, A. C., Butler, H., Forsyth, C., & Cai, Z. (2012). Operation ARA: a
computerized learning game that teaches critical thinking and scientific reasoning. Thinking Skills and
Creativity, 7(2), 93–100.

466

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141–
158.
Hu, X., Cai, Z., Han, L., Craig, S. D., Wang, T., & Graesser, A. C. (2009). AutoTutor Lite. In V. Dimitrova, R.
Mizoguchi, B. Du Boulay, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education
(AIED) 2009 (p. 802). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Hu, X., & Graesser, A. C. (2004). Human use regulatory affairs advisor (HURAA): learning about research
ethics with intelligent learning modules. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36(2),
241–249.
Hwang, G. J., & Tsai, C. C. (2011). Research trends in mobile and ubiquitous learning: a review of
publications in selected journals from 2001 to 2010. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(4),
E65–E70.
Jackson, G. T., Dempsey, K. B., & McNamara, D. S. (2010). The evolution of an automated reading strategy
tutor: From the classroom to a game-enhanced automated system. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh (Eds.),
New science of learning (pp. 283–306). New York: Springer.
Jackson, G. T., Dempsey, K. B., & McNamara, D. S. (2011). Short and long term benefits of enjoyment and
learning within a serious game. In G. Biswas, S. Bull, J. Kay, & A. Mitrovic (Eds.), Proceedings of
Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) 2011 (pp. 139–146). Berlin: Springer.
Jackson, G. T., & Graesser, A. C. (2006). Applications of human tutorial dialog in AutoTutor: an intelligent
tutoring system. Revista Signos, 39, 31–48.
Jackson, G. T., & Graesser, A. C. (2007). Content matters: An investigation of feedback categories within an
ITS. In R. Luckin, K. Koedinger, & J. Greer (Eds.), Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education
(AIED) 2007 (pp. 127–134). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Jackson, G. T., Olney, A., Graesser, A. C., & Kim, H. J. (2006). AutoTutor 3-D simulations: Analyzing user’s
actions and learning trends. In R. Son (Ed.), Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1557–1562). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Johnson, W. L., & Rickel, J. (1997). Steve: an animated pedagogical agent for procedural training in virtual
environments. ACM SIGART Bulletin, 8(1–4), 16–21.
Johnson, W. L., Rickel, J. W., & Lester, J. C. (2000). Animated pedagogical agents: face-to-face interaction in
interactive learning environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11(1), 47–
78.
Jordan, P. W., Makatchev, M., Pappuswamy, U., VanLehn, K., & Albacete, P. L. (2006). A natural
language tutorial dialogue system for physics. In G. Sutcliffe & R. Goebel (Eds.), Proceedings
of Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society Conference (FLAIRS) 2006 (pp. 521–526).
Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
Kim, H. J., Graesser, A. C., Jackson, G. T., Olney, A., & Chipman, P. (2005). The effectiveness of computer
simulations in a computer-based learning environment. In Proceedings for e-Learn 2005: World
Conference on E-learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher Education (pp. 1362–
1367). Vancouver: AACE.
Kim, N., Evens, M., Michael, J. A., & Rovick, A. A. (1989). CIRCSIM-TUTOR: An intelligent tutoring
system for circulatory physiology. In H. Maurer (Ed.), Proceedings of Computer Assisted Learning, 360
(pp. 254–266). Berlin: Springer.
Klahr, D. (2002). Exploring science: The cognition and development of discovery processes. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Koedinger, K. R., Aleven, V., Heffernan, N., McLaren, B., & Hockenberry, M. (2004). Opening the
door to non-programmers: Authoring intelligent tutor behavior by demonstration. In J. Lester,
R. Vicari, & F. Paraguaçu (Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 2004 (pp.
162–174). Berlin: Springer.
Koedinger, K. R., Aleven, V., Roll, I., & Baker, R. (2009). In vivo experiments on whether supporting
metacognition in intelligent tutoring systems yields robust learning. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.), Handbook of metacognition in education (The Educational Psychology Series, pp. 897–
964). New York: Routledge.
Kopp, K. J., Britt, M. A., Millis, K., & Graesser, A. C. (2012). Improving the efficiency of dialogue in
tutoring. Learning and Instruction, 22(5), 320–330.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25(2–3), 259–284.
Langston, M. C., & Graesser, A. C. (1993). The “Point and Query” interface: exploring knowledge by asking
questions. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 2(4), 355–367.
Leelawong, K., & Biswas, G. (2008). Designing learning by teaching agents: the Betty’s Brain system.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 18(3), 181–208.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

467

Lehman, B., D’Mello, S. K., Strain, A., Mills, C., Gross, M., Dobbins, A., Wallace, P., Millis, K., & Graesser,
A. C. (2013). Inducing and tracking confusion with contradictions during complex learning. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 22, 85–105.
Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2002). The wisdom of practice: Lessons learned from the study of highly
effective tutors. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors
on education (pp. 135–158). Orlando: Academic Press.
Lester, J. C., Towns, S. G., & Fitzgerald, P. J. (1998). Achieving affective impact: visual emotive communication in lifelike pedagogical agents. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 10,
278–291.
Link, K. E., Kreuz, R. J., & Graesser, A. C. (2001). Factors that influence the perception of
feedback delivered by a pedagogical agent. International Journal of Speech Technology, 4(2),
145–153.
Long, Y., & Aleven, V. (2013). Skill diaries: Improve student learning in an intelligent tutoring system with
periodic self-assessment. In H. C. Lane, K. Yacef, J. Mostow, & P. Pavlik (Eds.), Proceedings of Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED) 2013 (pp. 219–228). Berlin: Springer.
Lu, X., Di Eugenio, B., Kershaw, T. C., Ohlsson, S., & Corrigan-Halpern, A. (2007). Expert vs. non-expert
tutoring: Dialogue moves, interaction patterns and multi-utterance turns. In Computational Linguistics
and Intelligent Text Processing (pp. 456–467). Berlin: Springer.
Magliano, J. P., Todaro, S., Millis, K., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Kim, H. J., & McNamara, D. S. (2005). Changes
in reading strategies as a function of reading training: a comparison of live and computerized training.
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 32(2), 185–208.
Massaro, D. W. (1998). Perceiving talking faces: From speech perception to a behavioral principle (Vol. 1).
Cambridge: MIT Press.
McNamara, D. S., Graesser, A. C., McCarthy, P. M., & Cai, Z. (2014). Automated evaluation of text and
discourse with Coh-Metrix. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNamara, D. S., & Magliano, J. P. (2009). Self-explanation and metacognition. In D. Hacker, J. Donlosky, &
A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Handbook of metacognition in education (pp. 60–81). New York: Taylor &
Francis.
McNamara, D. S., O’Reilly, T. P., Best, R. M., & Ozuru, Y. (2006). Improving adolescent students’
reading comprehension with iSTART. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 34(2), 147–
171.
McNamara, D. S., O’Reilly, T., Rowe, M., Boonthum, C., & Levinstein, I. B. (2007). iSTART: A web-based
tutor that teaches self-explanation and metacognitive reading strategies. Reading comprehension strategies: Theories, interventions, and technologies, 397–421.
McNamara, D. S., Raine, R., Roscoe, R., Crossley, S., Jackson, G. T., Dai, J., & Graesser, A. C. (2012). The
Writing-Pal: Natural language algorithms to support intelligent tutoring on writing strategies. Applied
natural language processing and content analysis: Identification, investigation, and resolution, (pp. 298–
311). Hershey: IGI Global.
Metcalfe, J., & Kornell, N. (2005). A region or proximal of learning model of study time allocation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 52, 463–477.
Merrill, D. C., Reiser, B. J., Ranney, M., & Trafton, J. G. (1992). Effective tutoring techniques: a comparison
of human tutors and intelligent tutoring systems. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(3), 277–305.
Millis, K., Forsyth, C., Butler, H., Wallace, P., Graesser, A., & Halpern, D. (2011). Operation ARIES!: A
serious game for teaching scientific inquiry. In Serious games and edutainment applications (pp. 169–
195). London: Springer.
Morrison, D., Nye, B. D., & Hu, X. (2014). Where in the data stream are we? Analyzing the flow of text in
dialogue-based systems for learning. In R. Sottilare, A. Graesser, X. Hu, & B. Goldberg (Eds.), Design
recommendations for intelligent tutoring systems: Instructional management (pp. 237–247). Orlando:
U.S. Army Research Laboratory.
Nesbit, J. C., & Adesope, O. O. (2006). Learning with concept and knowledge maps: a meta-analysis. Review
of Educational Research, 76(3), 413–448.
Nwana, H. S. (1990). Intelligent tutoring systems: an overview. Artificial Intelligence Review, 4(4), 251–277.
Nwana, H. S. (1996). Software agents: an overview. Knowledge Engineering Review, 11(3), 205–244.
Nye, B. D. (2013). Integrating GIFT and AutoTutor with Sharable Knowledge Objects (SKO). In R.
A. Sottilare, & H. K. Holden (Eds.), Proceedings of the Artificial Intelligence in Education
(AIED) 2013 Workshop on the Generalized Intelligent Framework for Tutoring (GIFT), (pp.
54–61). CEUR.
Nye, B. D., Graesser, A. C., & Hu, X. (2014a). Multimedia learning with intelligent tutoring systems. In R.
Mayer (Ed.), Multimedia learning (3rd ed., pp. 703–728). New York: Cambridge University Press.

468

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

Nye, B. D., Hajeer, M., Forsyth, C., Samei, B., Hu, X., & Millis, K. (2014). Exploring real-time student
models based on natural-language tutoring sessions: A look at the relative importance of predictors. In Z.
Pardos and J. Stamper (eds.), Educational Data Mining (EDM) 2014, (pp.253–256).
Olney, A. M. (2009). GnuTutor: An open source intelligent tutoring system. In V. Dimitrova, R. Mizoguchi, B.
Du Boulay, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) 2009 (p.
803). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Olney, A., D’Mello, S., Person, N., Cade, W., Hayes, P., Williams, C., Lehman, B., & Graesser, A. C. (2012).
Guru: A computer tutor that models expert human tutors. In S. A. Cerri & B. Clancey (Eds.), Proceedings
of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 2012 (pp. 256–261). Berlin: Springer.
Pashler, H., Cepeda, J. T., Wixted, J. T., & Rohrer, D. (2005). When does feedback facilitate learning of
words? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 3–8.
Person, N. K., Erkel, M., Graesser, A. C., & the Tutoring Research Group. (2002). AutoTutor passes the
bystander Turing test. In M. Driscoll & T. C. Reeves (Eds.), Proceedings for E-Learning 2002: World
Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, & Higher Education (pp. 778–782).
Montreal: AACE.
Person, N. K., Graesser, A. C., Kreuz, R. J., & Pomeroy, V. (2003). Simulating human tutor dialog moves in
AutoTutor. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 23–39.
Person, N. K., Graesser, A. C., Magliano, J. P., & Kreuz, R. J. (1994). Inferring what the student knows in oneto-one tutoring: the role of student questions and answers. Learning and Individual Differences, 6, 205–
219.
Person, N. K., Kreuz, R. J., Zwaan, R., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). Pragmatics and pedagogy: conversational
rules and politeness strategies may inhibit effective tutoring. Cognition and Instruction, 13, 161–188.
Person, N. K., Olney, A., D’Mello, S. K., & Lehman, B. (2012). Interactive concept maps and learning
outcomes in Guru. In G. Youngblood & P. McCarthy (Eds.), Proceedings of the Florida Artificial
Intelligence Research Symposium (FLAIRS) 2012 (pp. 456–461). Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
Prince, M. (2004). Does active learning work? A review of the research. Journal of Engineering Education, 93
(3), 223–231.
Ritter, S., Anderson, J. R., Koedinger, K. R., & Corbett, A. (2007). Cognitive Tutor: applied research in
mathematics education. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(2), 249–255.
Roll, I., Aleven, V., McLaren, B. M., & Koedinger, K. R. (2011). Improving students’ help-seeking skills
using metacognitive feedback in an intelligent tutoring system. Learning and Instruction, 21(2), 267–280.
Roscoe, R. D., & McNamara, D. S. (2013). Writing pal: feasibility of an intelligent writing strategy tutor in the
high school classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(4), 1010–1025.
Rosenshine, B., Meister, C., & Chapman, S. (1996). Teaching students to generate questions: a review of the
intervention studies. Review of Educational Research, 66, 181–221.
Rouet, J. (2006). The skills of document use: From text comprehension to web-based learning. Mahwah:
Erlbaum.
Rus, V., & Graesser, A. C. (2006). Deeper natural language processing for evaluating student answers in
intelligent tutoring systems. Proceedings of the American Association of Artificial Intelligence. Menlo
Park, CA: AAAI.
Rus, V., Baggett, W., Gire, E., Franceschetti, D., Conley, M., Graesser, A.C. (2013a). Towards Learner Models
based on Learning Progressions in DeepTutor. In Sottilare, R. (Eds.), Learner Models, (pp. 185–196)
Army Research Lab.
Rus, V., Banjade, R., Lintean, M., Niraula, N., & Stefanescu, D. (2013b). SEMILAR: A Semantic Similarity
Toolkit for Assessing Students’ Natural Language Inputs. In D’Mello, S. K., Calvo, R. A., & Olney, A.
(Eds.), Proceedings of Educational Data Mining 2013 (pp. 402–403).
Rus, V., D’Mello, S. K., Hu, X., & Graesser, A. C. (2013c). Recent Advances in conversational intelligent
tutoring systems. AI Magazine, 34, 42–54.
Rus, V., McCarthy, P. M., McNamara, D. S., & Graesser, A. C. (2008). A study of textual entailment.
International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, 17(04), 659–685.
Rus, V., McCarthy, P. M., Graesser, A. C., & McNamara, D. S. (2009). Identification of sentence-to-sentence
relations using a textual entailer. Research on Language and Computation, 7(2–4), 209–229.
Rus, V., Stefanescu, D., Baggett, W., Niraula, N., Franceschetti, D., & Graesser, A. C. (2014). Macroadaptation in conversational intelligent tutoring matters. In S. Trausan-Matu, K. E. Boyer, M. Crosby,
& K. Panourgia (Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 2014 (pp. 242–247). Berlin:
Springer.
Schwartz, D., & Bransford, D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475–522.
Self, J. (1990). Theoretical foundations for intelligent tutoring systems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 1(4), 3–14.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2014) 24:427–469

469

Shaffer, D. W. (2006). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Shaffer, D. W. & Graesser, A. C. (2010). Using a quantitative model of participation in a community of
practice to direct automated mentoring in an ill-defined domain. In C. Lynch, K. Ashley, T. Mitrovic, V.
Dimitrova, N. Pinkwart, & V. Aleven (Eds.), Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Intelligent
Tutoring Systems and Ill-Defined Domains (pp. 61–68).
Shubeck, K., Craig, S. D., Hu, X., Faghihi, U., Levy, M., & Koch, R. (2012). Incorporating natural language
tutoring into a virtual world for emergency response training. In P. M. McCarthy & G. M. Youngblood
(Eds.), Proceedings of Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society (FLAIRS) 2012 (p. 573). Menlo
Park: AAAI Press.
Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78, 153–189.
Song, K. S., Hu, X., Olney, A., & Graesser, A. C. (2004). A framework of synthesizing tutoring conversation
capability with web-based distance education courseware. Computers & Education, 42(4), 375–388.
Sottilare, R. A., Goldberg, B. S., Brawner, K. W., & Holden, H. K. (2012). A modular framework to support
the authoring and assessment of adaptive computer-based tutoring systems (CBTS). In The Interservice/
Industry Training, Simulation & Education Conference (I/ITSEC) 2012 (1). Arlington, VA: National
Training Systems Association.
Stevens, A. L., & Collins, A. (1977). The goal structure of a Socratic tutor. In J. Ketchel (Ed.), Proceedings of
the ACM Conference 1977 (pp. 256–263). New York: ACM Press.
Susarla, S., Adcock, A., Van Eck, R., Moreno, K., & Graesser, A. C. (2003). Development and evaluation of a
lesson authoring tool for AutoTutor. In V. Aleven, U. Hoppe, J. Kay, R. Mizoguchi, H. Pain, F. Verdejo, &
K. Yacef (Eds.), AIED2003 Supplemental Proceedings (pp. 378–387). Sydney: University of Sydney
School of Information Technologies.
VanLehn, K. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems, and other
tutoring systems. Educational Psychologist, 46(4), 197–221.
VanLehn, K., Graesser, A. C., Jackson, G. T., Jordan, P., Olney, A., & Rosé, C. P. (2007). When are tutorial
dialogues more effective than reading? Cognitive Science, 31(1), 3–62.
VanLehn, K., Siler, S., Murray, C., Yamauchi, T., & Baggett, W. B. (2003). Why do only some events cause
learning during human tutoring? Cognition and Instruction, 21(3), 209–249.
VanLehn, K., van de Sande, B., Shelby, R., & Gershman, S. (2010). The Andes physics tutoring system: An
experiment in freedom. In R. Nkambou, R. Mizoguchi, & J. Bourdeau (Eds.), Advances in intelligent
tutoring systems (pp. 421–443). Berlin: Springer.
Wang, N., Johnson, W. L., Mayer, R. E., Rizzo, P., Shaw, E., & Collins, H. (2008). The politeness effect:
pedagogical agents and learning outcomes. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(2),
98–112.
Wolfe, C. R., Fisher, C. R., Reyna, V. F., & Hu, X. (2012). Improving internal consistency in conditional
probability estimation with an intelligent tutoring system and web-based tutorials. International Journal
of Internet Science, 7(1), 37–54.
Wolfe, C. R., Widmer, C. L., Reyna, V. F., Hu, X., Cedillos, E. M., Fisher, C. R., & Weil, A. M. (2013). The
development and analysis of tutorial dialogues in AutoTutor Lite. Behavior Research Methods, 45(3),
623–636.
Wood, D., & Wood, H. (1996). Vygotsky, tutoring and learning. Oxford Review of Education, 22(1), 5–16.
Woolf, B. P. (2009). Building intelligent interactive tutors: Student-centered strategies for revolutionizing elearning. Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann.
Woolf, B. P., Arroyo, I., Muldner, K., Burleson, W., Cooper, D. G., Dolan, R., & Christopherson, R. M.
(2010). The effect of motivational learning companions on low achieving students and students with
disabilities. In V. Aleven, J. Kay, & J. Mostow (Eds.), Proceedings of Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS)
2010 (pp. 327–337). Berlin: Springer.

View publication stats

