612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 48, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2005

AutoTutor: An Intelligent Tutoring System
With Mixed-Initiative Dialogue
Arthur C. Graesser, Fellow, IEEE, Patrick Chipman, Brian C. Haynes, and Andrew Olney

Abstract—AutoTutor simulates a human tutor by holding a
conversation with the learner in natural language. The dialogue
is augmented by an animated conversational agent and three-dimensional (3-D) interactive simulations in order to enhance the
learner’s engagement and the depth of the learning. Grounded in
constructivist learning theories and tutoring research, AutoTutor
achieves learning gains of approximately 0.8 sigma (nearly one
letter grade), depending on the learning measure and comparison
condition. The computational architecture of the system uses the
.NET framework and has simplified deployment for classroom
trials.

This paper has four parts. First, there is a brief overview
of AutoTutor’s pedagogical strategies that embody a constructivist approach to instruction. Second, student assessment data
are presented from both controlled laboratory experiments and
classroom use of AutoTutor. Third, the architecture of the AutoTutor intelligent tutoring system is presented. Finally, a description is given of some new advancements in the system, including
a version of AutoTutor on conceptual Newtonian physics that
has interactive simulations.

Index Terms—Conversational agents, intelligent tutoring systems, natural language dialogue, STEM learning, tutoring.

I. PEDAGOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF AUTOTUTOR

A

UTOTUTOR is a complex system that simulates a human
or ideal tutor by holding a conversation with the learner in
natural language [1]–[3]. AutoTutor presents a series of challenging questions (or problems) that require approximately a
paragraph of information to answer correctly. An example question in conceptual physics is, “When a car without head rests
on the seats is struck from behind, the passengers often suffer
neck injuries. Why do passengers get neck injuries in this situation?” Although a perfect answer to this question is approximately three to seven sentences in length, the initial answers by
actual human learners are typically only one word to two sentences in length. AutoTutor assists the learner in the construction of an improved answer that draws out more of the learner’s
knowledge and that adaptively corrects problems with the answer. The dialogue between AutoTutor and the learner typically
lasts 50 to 200 conversational turns for one challenging question. Table I presents an annotated analysis of the example dialogue by specifying the categorized dialogue moves of AutoTutor, the classified speech acts of the student, and assorted
comments to help the reader interpret the tutorial dialogue.1
Manuscript received July 29, 2004; revised July 9, 2005. The research on
AutoTutor was supported by the National Science Foundation (SBR 9720314,
REC 0106965, REC 0127275, ITR 0326428) and the DoD Multidisciplinary
University Research Initiative (MURI) administered by ONR under Grant
N00014-00-1-0600. The Tutoring Research Group (TRG) is an interdisciplinary research team comprising approximately 35 researchers from psychology,
computer science, physics, and education (see http://www.autotutor.org).
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
NSF, DoD, or ONR.
The authors are with the University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152-3230
USA (e-mail: a-graesser@memphis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TE.2005.856149

1The content expressed by either AutoTutor or the student in Table I are signified in italics. Discourse categories of AutoTutor’s dialogue moves have been
added in capitals, whereas other information is added in normal font.

The design of AutoTutor was motivated by three lines of research in education and cognitive science. First, there are explanation-based constructivist theories of learning [4], [5]. Such
theories assume that learning is more effective and deeper when
the learner must actively generate explanations, justifications,
and functional procedures than when merely given information
to read. The explanations are pedagogically deep in the sense
that the learner must be able to express the causal and functional underpinnings of a mechanism rather than mechanically
applying procedures and formulae. Second, there are intelligent tutoring systems that adaptively respond to the learner’s
actions [3]–[6]. These tutors give immediate feedback to the
learner’s actions and guide the learner on what to do next in
a fashion that is sensitive to what the system infers the learner
knows. Third, empirical research has documented the collaborative constructive activities that routinely occur during human
tutoring [7], [8]. The patterns of discourse uncovered in naturalistic tutoring were imported into the dialogue management
facilities of AutoTutor.
One of AutoTutor’s prominent dialogue patterns is called expectation and misconception tailored dialogue (EMT dialogue),
which is known to be common in human tutoring [3], [8], [9].
Both AutoTutor and human tutors typically have a list of anticipated good answers (called expectations) and a list of misconceptions associated with each main question or problem. One
goal of the tutor is to coach the student in covering the list of
expectations. Another goal is to correct misconceptions that are
manifested in the student’s talk and actions. Yet another goal is
to give feedback and adaptively respond to the student. The expectations and misconceptions associated with a main question
are stored in AutoTutor’s curriculum script. AutoTutor provides
feedback to the learner (positive, neutral, and negative feedback), pumps the learner for more information (“What else?”),
prompts the learner to fill in missing words, gives hints, fills in
missing information with assertions, identifies and corrects bad
answers, answers learners’ questions, and summarizes answers.

0018-9359/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

GRAESSER et al.: AUTOTUTOR: AN INTELLIGENT TUTORING SYSTEM WITH MIXED-INITIATIVE DIALOGUE

TABLE I
EXAMPLE AUTOTUTOR–STUDENT DIALOGUE WITH CLASSIFIED
DIALOGUE MOVES OF AUTOTUTOR

613

As the learner expresses information over many turns, the information in the three to seven sentences of an expected answer
is eventually covered, and the question is scored as answered.
During the process of supplying the ideal answer, the learner
periodically articulates misconceptions and false assertions. If
these misconceptions have been anticipated in advance and incorporated into the program, AutoTutor provides the learner
with information to correct the misconceptions. Therefore, as
the learner expresses information over the turns, this information is compared with expectations and misconceptions, and
AutoTutor formulates its dialogue moves in a fashion that is
sensitive to the learner input. In short, the dialogue management component adaptively selects hints, prompts, assertions,
and targeted three-dimensional (3-D) simulations in an attempt
to achieve pattern completion.
A. Evaluating Student Contributions
AutoTutor uses Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) as its primary, conceptual, pattern-matching algorithm when evaluating
whether student input matches the expectations and misconceptions. LSA is a high-dimensional statistical technique that measures the conceptual similarity of any two pieces of text [9], [10].
The size of the text may vary from being a single word to a sentence, paragraph, or lengthier document. LSA-based similarity
metrics are capable of evaluating the quality of learner contributions almost as well as graduate students in the subject matter,
i.e., physics or computer literacy [1], [9]. With LSA, students
can use bad grammar and vague, approximate terminology as
long as the words that they use are associated with the correct
words in the LSA space. This use of LSA makes AutoTutor robust and domain portable.
B. Dialogue Mechanisms and Strategies
AutoTutor’s style of pedagogy is captured computationally
in several mechanisms. First, the order of introducing main
questions and covering expectations is not fixed or linear, but
rather follows different trajectories depending on the talk and
actions of the student. By allowing students to follow their own
natural trajectory through the curriculum content, AutoTutor
promotes the active generation of explanations according to the
constructivist pedagogy. Second, a mechanism for AutoTutor
selects hints, prompts, assertions, and other dialogue moves
that attempt to maximize the student articulating a particular
expectation or a lengthy answer. The mechanism is somewhat analogous to the minimax algorithm in chess-playing
programs, except in this case AutoTutor tries to maximize the
student’s scoring points in contributing information, instead of
minimizing it.
Third, AutoTutor uses and tests alternative pedagogical principles when deciding what expectation to select next during the
course of coaching the student to construct explanations. Several of these principles [1], [11], [12] exist, but only two are
addressed here. The frontier learning or zone of proximal development principle selects the next expectation that builds on what
the student knows. An example will explain how this principle is
implemented in AutoTutor. For example, there may be seven expectations that have LSA coverage values that vary from zero to
one. These LSA values increase as the AutoTutor–learner con-

614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 48, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2005

versation evolves, and more expectations get covered. At some
point, two of the seven may have been covered because the LSA
coverage score meets or exceeds some threshold ; the other
five expectations have subthreshold coverage values. The frontier learning principle selects the expectation with the highest
subthreshold LSA value. This decision mechanism is different
from the coherence principle, which attempts to maximize the
coherence of the conversation. The coherence principle selects
the next expectation that is most similar to the previous expectation that was just covered; the similarity is once again determined by the LSA.
The dialogue mechanisms of AutoTutor are both computationally manageable and similar to what human tutors do.
Human tutors cannot deeply comprehend all of the contributions
of students, most of which are imprecise, vague, fragmentary,
incomplete, and ungrammatical [8]. What human tutors can do
is compare student input with anticipated good answers and
misconceptions. LSA provides a suitable algorithm for these
comparison operations.
II. EMPIRICAL EVALUATIONS OF AUTOTUTOR
Four performance criteria have been considered in previous
evaluations of AutoTutor. The first is whether particular computational modules of AutoTutor produce output that is valid
and meets the intended technical specifications. Prior analyses
have shown that AutoTutor’s LSA component performs conceptual pattern-matching operations almost as well as human
judges [9]. When AutoTutor grades the percentage of expectations that are covered in an answer to a question, the correlation
between AutoTutor and a graduate student expert has been ap, whereas two graduate students correlate
proximately
. AutoTutor’s speech act and question
approximately
classifier have also had a high degree of accuracy [13], with
between .86 and .97 of its decisions agreeing with experts of
language and discourse. The second type of evaluation assesses
the quality of the dialogue moves produced by AutoTutor. The
central question is whether AutoTutor’s dialogue moves support a conversation that is coherent and relevant. The third criterion is whether AutoTutor produces learning gains. The fourth
is whether learners enjoy interacting with AutoTutor. The scope
of this paper does not permit a review of all of the performance
evaluations of AutoTutor, but a few words are devoted to the
second and third types of evaluation.
A. Evaluations of Dialogue Quality
Expert judges have evaluated AutoTutor with respect to conversational smoothness and the pedagogical quality of its dialogue moves [1], [2], [14]. Perhaps the most informative test
has been a bystander Turing test on the naturalness of AutoTutor’s dialogue moves [14]. In these studies, a random selection of tutor moves in the tutorial dialogues between students
and AutoTutor takes place. Human tutors are then asked to fill
in what they would say at these random points. Therefore, at
each of these random tutor turns, content is generated by either AutoTutor or human tutors. A group of students (the bystanders) are subsequently asked to decide whether these dialogue moves are generated by a computer versus a human; half,

in fact, were generated by computer and half by humans. The
results surprisingly revealed that the bystander students were
unable to discriminate whether particular dialogue moves had
been generated by a computer versus a human. The hit rate did
not significantly differ from chance, .51, when computing the
likelihood that bystanders decided that a computer produced
the turn when, in fact, the computer had; the false alarm rate
was .53 (i.e., bystanders deciding a computer produced a turn
when, in fact, a human did). The participants could not distinguish AutoTutor from a skilled human tutor when rating moves
on a more sensitive six-point scale that varied from “likely a
computer” to “likely a human”; in other words, the effects of
changing the speaker were not significantly detectable in any
,
. These results of
statistical tests,
the bystander Turing test support the claim that AutoTutor is a
good simulation of human tutors. AutoTutor manages to have
productive and reasonably smooth conversations even though
it approximately understands, but does not completely understand, what the student expresses. Perhaps tutorial dialogue is
not highly constrained; thus, the tutor has a high degree of latitude on what can be said without disrupting the conversation.
In this sense, tutoring conversations are more flexible than other
conversation settings.
B. Evaluations of Pedagogical Quality
AutoTutor has been evaluated on learning gains in over a
dozen experiments on the topics of computer literacy [1] and
conceptual physics [15]. These studies have been conducted on
college students in either a laboratory or a classroom setting. In
some experiments, the students have intermediate-level knowledge that is achieved shortly after they are being trained on
Newtonian physics. These students received extra course credit
either 1) at the beginning of a second undergraduate physics
course or an engineering course that covered Newton’s laws
or 2) in an initial college course at a point in the curriculum
immediately after Newtonian physics is covered. In other experiments, the students were enrolled in an introductory computer literacy course where they received extra credit for participating at a point in the curriculum at or near the particular
AutoTutor content that was covered (hardware, operating systems, and Internet). More recent studies have allowed physics
and engineering students to complete the AutoTutor studies at
home on the Internet.
The results of these studies have been quite positive, but before discussing such data, evaluations of learning gains must be
placed in some perspective. The literature in the area has established that one-to-one human tutoring is a powerful method
of promoting learning [16], [18], even though most human tutors have moderate subject matter knowledge and no training in
pedagogy or tutoring. These unaccomplished human tutors enhanced learning with an effect size of .4 standard deviation units
(called sigmas), which translates to an improvement of approximately half a letter grade [16]. Intelligent tutoring systems with
sophisticated pedagogical tactics, but no natural language dialogue, produce effect sizes of approximately 1 sigma [18]. Effect sizes are focused upon here because sigmas have recently
been adopted as the appropriate statistical yardstick in assessing
the impact of treatments in education research. Traditional tests

GRAESSER et al.: AUTOTUTOR: AN INTELLIGENT TUTORING SYSTEM WITH MIXED-INITIATIVE DIALOGUE

of statistical significance (e.g., t or F) do not measure the magnitude or robustness of treatment effects, but only the likelihood
that any significant effect at all (binary decision) exists, independent of the magnitude of the effect.
The methodology of testing the impact of AutoTutor on
learning gains is straightforward. Learners complete a pretest
on the subject matter, and then interact with AutoTutor (for
one to eight hours, depending on the experiment), and then
complete a post-test that is an alternate counterbalanced version
of the pretest. The AutoTutor treatment is compared with one
or more comparison conditions that remove one, many, or all
pedagogical components of AutoTutor. In ten experiments
on over 1000 college students, AutoTutor has almost always
produced statistically significant gains of .2 to 1.5 sigma
(with a mean of .8), depending on the learning performance
measure, the comparison condition (either pretest scores or a
control condition in which the learner reads the textbook for an
equivalent amount of time as the tutoring session), the subject
matter, and the version of AutoTutor [1]. For example, a recent
study involved testing AutoTutor in the physics domain on 35
college students enrolled at three universities. The participants
were given AutoTutor training, allowed to read a textbook on
physics, or given no training at all. A learning gain of 1.02
sigma over the textbook control was found, which was significant when analyzed using an ANCOVA with the pretest scores
,
[15].
as a covariate,
Approximately a dozen measures of learning have been collected in these assessments on the topics of computer literacy
and physics. These include the following:
1) multiple-choice questions on shallow knowledge that tap
definitions, facts, and properties of concepts;
2) multiple-choice questions on deep knowledge that taps
causal reasoning, justifications of claims, and functional
underpinnings of procedures;
3) essay quality when students attempt to answer challenging problems;
4) a cloze task that has subjects fill in missing words of
texts that articulate explanatory reasoning on the subject
matter;
5) performance on problems that require problem solving.
These evaluations place previous versions of AutoTutor somewhere between an unaccomplished human tutor and an intelligent tutoring system. Surprisingly, one recent evaluation of
physics tutoring reported that the learning gains produced by
accomplished human tutors in computer-mediated communication were equivalent to the gains produced by AutoTutor [15].
The largest learning gains have been on deep-reasoning measures rather than measures of shallow knowledge. Replications
of these analyses on the most recent version of AutoTutor with
interactive simulation (AutoTutor 3-D, as discussed later) are in
progress and look promising.
To collect data in more real-world educational settings,
AutoTutor has been made freely available on the Internet for
any interested course instructor or student. Data have been
collected at three southern universities other than the University
of Memphis, Memphis, TN. For example, in fall 2004, 32
students from two classes completed AutoTutor and showed a

615

Fig. 1. Overview of the AutoTutor architecture.

statistically significant increase in learning between pretest to
,
). The distributed nature of the
post-test (
new AutoTutor architecture makes collecting data from large
500) much more efficient
numbers of simultaneous users (
than in the previous versions, resulting in a fiftyfold increase.
III. ARCHITECTURE OF AUTOTUTOR
This section briefly sketches the overall computational architecture of AutoTutor. Several versions of AutoTutor’s architecture have been described in previous literature [2], [3], [17];
however, this paper focuses on the most recent version with interactive 3-D simulation. This version is called AutoTutor-3D,
even though there is the option of removing the 3-D simulation
module.
AutoTutor 3-D is a distributed client–server application on
the Internet, capable of “scaling out” to multiple computers as
necessary to handle greater load. The components of the system
are divided into modules, utilities, and the hub, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. The AutoTutor-3D server is a distributed hub-and-spokes
application that may reside on multiple servers or on a single
server. In the standard hub-and-spokes configuration, only the
hub knows about the existence of the modules. Therefore, any
component that provides the data specified by a state object may
be interchangeably used. The hub receives a state object from
the client and then passes the state object to various modules
in a scripted order [17]. The basic architecture concept is similar to that of the DARPA Communicator [19]. Modules are defined by their ability to input and output state objects, which
greatly simplifies communication and interoperability between
modules. Modules call various utilities, such as LSA facilities
or databases that have their own distinctive interface [17]. The
AutoTutor-3D architecture is much like a production line in that
modules each do a small bit of the work, and subsequent modules are dependent on preceding ones. Just as in a production
line, the modules are only interested in the work in front of them
and forget about previous work.
A concrete description of the processing stream is provided
when AutoTutor-3D attempts to handle one conversational turn
of the learner. The client computer sends a state object to the hub
after the student has typed in the content of the turn. The state
object is first passed to the language analyzer, which segments
the utterance into main clauses, parses the clauses, and assigns a

616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 48, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2005

speech act to each main clause [13]. The language analyzer uses
the Conexor EngLite parser [20] as a utility. The modified state
object is sent to the hub, which then sends it to the assessor. The
assessor updates the student model (i.e., what the student knows
about the expectations and misconceptions associated with the
problem) and produces a set of predictions about the likely effects of alternative dialogue moves on the student model. The assessor uses the LSA and the curriculum script database (i.e., the
major content repository of main questions and dialogue moves)
to update the student model and make predictions. Next, the assessor passes the updated state object to the hub, which forwards
it to the dialogue manager. The dialogue manager consults the
output of the previous modules and the dialogue information
state of the previous turn. The dialogue manager subsequently
updates the dialogue information state of the state object and
provides it with dialogue for the tutor’s turn. The updated state
object is passed to the hub, which forwards it back to the client.
The cycle is then completed for interpreting the student’s turn
and producing an adaptive response.
A few technical points are provided for those who are
interested in implementing similar systems. AutoTutor-3D is
written in C# and Visual Basic .NET, both languages that run
atop the managed .NET framework and common language
runtime (CLR). The CLR offers language-level compatibility
[21], meaning that each component of AutoTutor can easily
communicate with any other component, as long as the component is written in a CLR-compatible language. Over 30
programming languages have CLR-compatible compilers [22];
therefore, programmers can use the language of their choice.
The .NET framework offers a variety of libraries, including the
Remoting system that allows objects to be accessed quickly
and transparently over the network and that forms the basis of
the scalable infrastructure. Both the framework and the CLR
virtual machine run on Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, and other
operating systems, using open-source run times such as Mono
and Portable .NET. The use of Remoting’s binary communication channel allows the individual state table objects to be
sent with minimal latency, using under 12 kB of bandwidth.
The architecture’s abstraction of the details of this interface
provides developers with inherent thread safety and scalability.
Current analyses in progress suggest that, by using these technologies, any particular instance of an AutoTutor server can
handle over 500 simultaneous users with a memory footprint of
about 180 MB [17].
IV. RECENT ADVANCES IN AUTOTUTOR
AutoTutor’s extensible architecture is sufficiently powerful
and flexible that additional advanced learning technologies can
be quickly accommodated. Two of these advances are interactive 3-D simulations and responses to the learner’s emotional
states. The AutoTutor version with interactive 3-D simulation
has been applied to conceptual physics and is currently being
tested in physics and engineering courses.
A. AutoTutor With Interactive 3-D Simulation
The most recent version of AutoTutor has an embedded interactive 3-D simulation. A 3-D simulation provides an additional

channel of communication to discuss conceptual physics with
the learner. Each simulation is crafted to cover particular physics
expectations or to help correct particular misconceptions. For
each physics problem, an interactive simulation world in 3-D
Studio Max was developed, which included the people, objects,
and spatial setting associated with the problem. The students
can manipulate parameters of the situation (e.g., mass of objects, speed of objects, or distance between objects) and then
ask the system to simulate what will happen. They can compare
their expected simulated outcome with the actual outcome after
the simulation is completed. Moreover, they describe what they
see. Their actions and descriptions are evaluated with respect
to covering the expected principles in an ideal answer. In order
to manage the interactive simulation, AutoTutor gives hints and
suggestions, once again scaffolding the learning process with dialogue. Thus, AutoTutor combines interactive simulation with
mixed-initiative dialogue.
Fig. 2 shows the interface for the 3-D version of AutoTutor.
The main question is presented at the top of the screen. Beneath the question are two windows that show the car and truck
(middle window) and the driver in the car (right window). These
components move whenever a simulation is run. Beneath the
question on the left is the animated agent that guides the interaction with hints, suggestions, assertions, and other dialogue
moves. These suggestions include having the student manipulate parameters, such as truck speed, mass of the car, and mass
of the truck. The students also have a number of binary options:
having the head rests in the car on, showing the skin on the
driver, slowing down the simulation, and displaying vector arrows that depict forces. The student manipulates these parameters and options, as shown in the bottom left, before a simulation
is run. The activity of manipulating these inputs and viewing
the simulation is believed to provide a referentially grounded
and embodied representation of the problem and a deeper understanding of physics. The students can run as many simulations
as they wish until they feel they understand the relationship between the parameters and outcomes of simulations. However,
interacting with and viewing the simulations is not all that is
available. The participants are also prompted to describe what
they see and answer the main question. Therefore, deep learning
of physics is believed to emerge from the combination of interactivity, perceptual simulation, feedback on the simulation, and
explaining what happens.
There are a small number of other learning systems with conversational agents that combine dialogue with interactive simulation. Examples of these systems are Steve [23] and Mission
Rehearsal [24]. AutoTutor is the only system that is available
on the Internet that has systematically been tested on students
and that has flexible tutorial dialogue that scaffolds interactive
simulation.
B. Adapting to Learner Emotions
A version of AutoTutor that perceives and responds to
learner emotions in addition to the learner’s knowledge states
is currently in development. AutoTutor is augmented with
sensing devices and signal processing algorithms that classify
the affective states of learners. Emotions are classified on the

GRAESSER et al.: AUTOTUTOR: AN INTELLIGENT TUTORING SYSTEM WITH MIXED-INITIATIVE DIALOGUE

Fig. 2.

617

Computer screen of AutoTutor on conceptual physics with interactive 3-D simulation.

basis of dialogue patterns during tutoring, the content covered, facial expressions, body posture, mouse haptic pressure,
and keyboard pressure. This current project has two specific
objectives. First, AutoTutor will analyze patterns of facial,
body, and dialogue activity that arise while interacting with
AutoTutor and will classify this input into basic affect states
(such as confusion, frustration, boredom, interest, excitement,
and insight). Second, empirical investigations will take place
on whether learning gains and learner’s impressions of AutoTutor are influenced by dialogue moves of AutoTutor that are
sensitive to the learner’s emotions. For example, if the student
is extremely frustrated, then AutoTutor presumably should give
a good hint or prompt that directs the student in a more positive
learning trajectory. If the student is bored, AutoTutor should
give more engaging, challenging, and motivating problems. If
the student is very absorbed and happy, then AutoTutor should
be minimally directive.
At this point in the project, most of the emotion-sensing technologies have been assembled with AutoTutor, and the components, features, and representations of each of the sensing technologies are undergoing analysis. The channels currently being
analyzed are as follows:
1) AutoTutor’s log file with speech acts of student and tutor
turns, as well as knowledge states achieved from the tutorial dialogue;
2) an upper facial sensor device developed by Roz Picard’s
Affective Computing Lab at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), Cambridge [25], [26];
3) a body posture pressure measurement system;

4) a haptic pressure sensor for the mouse that was developed
at MIT;
5) a keyboard pressure sensor.
Affect states will be classified on the basis of these five input
channels. Computational models are being explored to perform
these emotion analyses [25], [27].
V. CONCLUSION
In closing, natural language dialogue facilities are not expected to do a reasonable job in all conversational contexts.
The quality of the discourse depends on the subject matter, the
knowledge of the learner, the expected depth of comprehension,
and the expected sophistication of the dialogue strategies. Natural-language dialogue facilities are unlikely to be impressive
when the subject matter requires mathematical or analytical precision and when the user would like to converse with a witty or
humorous conversation partner. In contrast, a natural-language
dialogue facility is more feasible in applications that involve imprecise verbal content, low-to-medium user knowledge about a
topic, and earnest literal replies. AutoTutor works well when
tutoring students on qualitative domains and when the shared
knowledge between the tutor and learner is low or moderate
(rather than high). If the shared knowledge is high, then both
dialogue participants (i.e., the computer tutor and the learner)
will be expecting a higher level of precision of mutual understanding and, therefore, will have a higher risk of failing to meet
each other’s expectations. Therefore, tutoring is an ideal testbed
for the research and development of natural-language dialogue

618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 48, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2005

systems. And of course, the practical benefit is helping children
and adults learn.
REFERENCES
[1] A. C. Graesser, S. Lu, G. T. Jackson, H. Mitchell, M. Ventura, A. Olney,
and M. M. Louwerse, “AutoTutor: A tutor with dialogue in natural language,” Behav. Res. Methods, Instrum., Comput., vol. 36, pp. 180–193,
2004.
[2] A. C. Graesser, N. K. Person, and D. Harter, “Teaching tactics and dialogue in AutoTutor,” Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ., vol. 12, pp. 257–279,
2001.
[3] A. C. Graesser, K. VanLehn, C. Rose, P. Jordan, and D. Harter, “Intelligent tutoring systems with conversational dialogue,” AI Mag., vol. 22,
pp. 39–51, 2001.
[4] V. Aleven and K. R. Koedinger, “An effective metacognitive strategy:
Learning by doing and explaining with a computer-based cognitive
tutor,” Cogn. Sci., vol. 26, pp. 147–179, 2002.
[5] K. Van Lehn, R. M. Jones, and M. T. H. Chi, “A model of the selfexplanation effect,” J. Learning Sci., vol. 2, pp. 1–60, 1992.
[6] J. R. Anderson, A. T. Corbett, K. R. Koedinger, and R. Pelletier, “Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned,” J. Learning Sci., vol. 4, pp. 167–207, 1995.
[7] M. T. H. Chi, S. A. Siler, H. Jeong, T. Yamauchi, and R. G. Hausmann,
“Learning from human tutoring,” Cogn. Sci., vol. 25, pp. 471–533, 2001.
[8] A. C. Graesser, N. K. Person, and J. P. Magliano, “Collaborative dialogue
patterns in naturalistic one-on-one tutoring,” Appl. Cogn. Psych., vol. 9,
pp. 359–387, 1995.
[9] A. C. Graesser, X. Hu, and D. S. McNamara, “Computerized learning
environments that incorporate research in discourse psychology, cognitive science, and computational linguistics,” in Experimental Cognitive
Psychology and Its Applications: Festschrift in Honor of Lyle Bourne,
Walter Kintsch, and Thomas Landauer, A. F. Healy, Ed. Washington,
DC: Amer. Psychological Assn, to be published.
[10] T. Landauer, P. W. Foltz, and D. Laham, “An introduction to latent semantic analysis,” Discourse Processes, vol. 25, pp. 259–284, 1998.
[11] How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School, J. D. Bransford, A. L. Brown, and R. R. Cocking, Eds., National Academy Press,
Washington, DC, 2000.
[12] D. Sleeman and J. S. Brown, Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Orlando,
FL: Academic, 1982.
[13] A. Olney, M. M. Louwerse, E. C. Mathews, J. Marineau, H. H. Mitchell,
and A. C. Graesser, “Utterance classification in AutoTutor,” in Building
Educational Applications Using Natural Language Processing: Proc.
Human Language Technology—North American Chapter Assn. Computational Linguistics Conf. 2003 Workshop, 2003, pp. 1–8.
[14] N. Person and A. C. Graesser, “Human or computer? AutoTutor in a bystander Turing test,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
2002, pp. 821–830.
[15] A. C. Graesser et al., “Why/AutoTutor: A test of learning gains from a
physics tutor with natural language dialogue,” in Proc. 25th Annu. Conf.
Cognitive Science Soc., 2003, pp. 1–6.
[16] P. A. Cohen, J. A. Kulik, and C. C. Kulik, “Educational outcomes of
tutoring: A meta-analysis of findings,” Amer. Educ. Res. J., vol. 19, pp.
237–248, 1982.
[17] P. Chipman, A. Olney, and A. C. Graesser, “The AutoTutor 3 architecture: A software architecture for an expandable, high-availability ITS,”
in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Web Information Systems Technologies (WEBIST
2005), 2005, pp. 466–473.
[18] A. T. Corbett, “Cognitive computer tutors: Solving the two-sigma
problem,” in Proc. 8th Annu. Conf. User Modeling, 2001, pp. 137–147.
[19] W. Xu and A. Rudnicky, “Task-based dialog management using
an agenda,” in Proc. Applied Natural Language Processing/North
American Association for Computational Linguistics (ANLP/NAACL)
2000 Workshop Conversational SystemsApplied Natural Language
Processing and North American Association for Computational Linguistics, May 2000, pp. 42–47.

[20] P. Tapanainen and T. Järvinen, “A nonprojective dependency parser,” in
Proc. 5th Conf. Applied Natural Language Processing, 1997, pp. 64–67.
[21] Microsoft .NET Technology Overview. Microsoft Corp., Seattle, WA.
[Online]. Available: http://msdn.microsoft.com/netframework/technologyinfo/overview/default.aspx
[22] B. Ritchie. (2004) NET Languages. [Online]. Available:
http://www12.brinkster.com/brianr/languages.aspx
[23] W. L. Johnson, J. W. Rickel, and J. C. Lester, “Animated pedagogical
agents: Face-to-face interaction in interactive learning environments,”
Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ., vol. 11, pp. 47–78, 2000.
[24] J. Gratch, J. Rickel, E. Andre, J. Cassell, E. Petajan, and N. Badler, “Creating interactive virtual humans: Some assembly required,” IEEE Intell.
Syst., vol. 17, pp. 54–63, 2002.
[25] R. W. Picard, Affective Computing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[26] A. Kapoor and R. Picard, “Real-time, fully automated upper facial feature tracking,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Automated Face Gesture Recognition, 2002, pp. 10–16.
[27] B. Kort, R. Reilly, and R. Picard, “An affective model of interplay
between emotions and learning: Reengineering educational pedagogy—Building a learning companion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Advanced
Learning Technologies, 2002, pp. 43–48.

Arthur C. Graesser (F’01) received the Ph.D. degree in psychology from the
University of California at San Diego in 1977.
He is currently a Full Professor in the Department of Psychology and an
Adjunct Professor in mathematical sciences at the University of Memphis,
Memphis, TN. He is currently a Co-Director of the Institute for Intelligent
Systems and Director of the Center for Applied Psychological Research.
He was a Visiting Researcher at Yale University, New Haven, CT, in 1983,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1984, and Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, in 1991. His primary research interests are in cognitive science
and discourse processing. More specific interests include knowledge representation, question asking and answering, tutoring, text comprehension, inference
generation, conversation, reading, education, memory, expert systems, artificial
intelligence, and human–computer interaction. He is currently Editor of the
journal Discourse Processes. In addition to publishing nearly 300 articles in
journals, books, and conference proceedings, he has written two books and
has edited eight books, the most recent one being the Handbook of Discourse
Processes (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2003).

Patrick Chipman is currently working toward the Master’s degree in cognitive
psychology at the University of Memphis, Memphis, TN.
He is one of the developers of AutoTutor, particularly its overall system architecture, and has research interests in virtual environments and social cognition.

Brian C. Haynes received the B.S. degree in computer science from the University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, in 2004.
He was one of the developers of AutoTutor, particularly its 3-D simulations system, and has research interests in computer graphics and network
applications.

Andrew Olney received the B.A. degree in linguistics with cognitive science
from the University of London, U.K., in 1998 and the M.Sc. degree in evolutionary and adaptive systems from the University of Sussex, U.K., in 2001. He
is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in mathematical sciences at the
University of Memphis, Memphis, TN.
He is one the developers of the AutoTutor system, particularly its natural language dialogue systems, and has research interests in computational linguistics
and robotics.

