Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 1

The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework:
Bridging the Science-Practice Chasm to Enhance Robust Student Learning
Kenneth R. Koedinger
Carnegie Mellon University
Albert T. Corbett
Carnegie Mellon University
Charles Perfetti
University of Pittsburgh
December 6, 2011. Word count: 19,185
Kenneth R. Koedinger, Human-Computer Interaction Institute and Department of Psychology;
Albert T. Corbett, Human-Computer Interaction Institute;
Charles Perfetti, Learning Research & Development Center and Department of Psychology
Thanks to the National Science Foundation (award SBE-0836012) for supporting the Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center and to past and present center members who have all contributed to
this work. We especially thank Kurt VanLehn, David Klahr, Ido Roll, and Vincent Aleven for
detailed comments on drafts of this paper.
Correspondence concerning this article should be directed to Ken Koedinger, Human-Computer
Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Email may be directed to
koedinger@cmu.edu.

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 2

Abstract
Despite the accumulation of substantial cognitive science research relevant to education, there
remains confusion and controversy in the application of research to educational practice. In
support of a more systematic approach, we describe the Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI)
framework. KLI promotes the emergence of instructional principles of high potential for
generality, while explicitly identifying constraints of and opportunities for detailed analysis of
the knowledge students may acquire in courses. Drawing on research across domains of science,
math, and language learning, we illustrate the analyses of knowledge, learning, and instructional
events that the KLI framework affords. We present a set of three coordinated taxonomies of
knowledge, learning, and instruction. For example, we identify three broad classes of learning
events: a) memory and fluency processes, b) induction and refinement processes, c)
understanding and sense-making processes, and we show how these can lead to different
knowledge changes and constraints on optimal instructional choices.

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 3

1. Introduction: The need for a learning-to-instruction theoretical framework
A substantial base of highly refined and extensively tested theories of cognition and
learning (e.g., Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; McClelland & Cleeremans, 2009; Newell, 1990; Son,
1994) provide broadly useful but limited guidelines for instruction. Theoretical frameworks and
design methods have been proposed that are directly relevant to instructional decision-making
(Bruner, 1966; Gagne, 1985; Engelmann & Carnine, 1991; Sweller, 1994; van Merrienboer &
Kirshner, 2007). However, we need instructional applications that are more grounded in
cognitive theories that explicate the role in learning of basic cognitive science concepts such as
memory, chunking, analogical transfer, reasoning, and problem solving. To bring instructional
decision making into closer contact with the science of learning, we propose a theoretical
framework that builds on the computational precision of cognitive science while addressing
instruction, not as an additional consideration, but as part of its basic conception. Our
framework embodies research-based principles and theoretical propositions, while demonstrating
pathways to instructional decision making. In doing so, the framework supports “rigorous,
sustained scientific research in education”, as urged by the National Research Council report
(Shavelson & Towne, 2002).
In the following sections, we first develop the basic background that motivates a general
theoretical framework for improving student learning. We then define and explain the basic
concepts that shape the theoretical framework. We follow with elaboration and examples across
academic domains, and exemplary instructional principles. We conclude by suggesting how the
framework can aid a sustained research effort and generate new hypotheses.
1.1 Educational Context and the Need for Instructional Principles
Heated debates in education (“education wars”) have been most visible in reading (e.g.,
Rayner, Foorman, Perfetti, Pesetsky, & Seidenberg, 2001) and math (e.g., Schoenfeld, 2004).
Research has informed these debates, particularly in reading. However, its impact is blunted by
larger contextual factors, including assumptions of both researchers and policy makers about
educational values, child development, and research standards. For example, advocates in these
debates tend to differ on the kinds of scientific support they value. Some emphasize rigor (e.g.,
internal validity, randomized controlled experiments) and others, relevance (e.g., ecological and
external validity and appropriate settings and assessments). Our approach addresses this divide
by embedding rigorous experimental research methods in the context of real learning, with real
students, in real contexts (see the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center at learnlab.org).
Our emphasis on connecting learning research to instructional principles is not unique.
Research in the learning sciences has led to statements of principles, including the influential
NRC report “How People Learn” (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000), instructional design
principles (e.g., Clark & Mayer, 2003), and learning principles drawn from psychology research
(http://www.psyc.memphis.edu/learning/principles/; Graesser, 2009). Progress in the “reading
wars” was marked by a succession of evidence-based recommendations (National Reading
Panel; 2000; Snow et al., 1996). Broad learning principles have been directed specifically at
teachers and educational decision makers (e.g., http://www.instituteforlearning.org/; Pashler et
al., 2008). We join the tradition of extracting principles from research because we believe that
finding the right level to communicate evidence based-generalizations is important for guidance
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 4

in instruction. However, we also are committed to the idea that principles must be based on
sound evidence that supports their generality and identifies their limiting conditions.
1.2 Levels of Analysis
Finding the right level of analysis or grain size for theory is a major question. In all
theories, including physical theories, the theoretical entities vary in the levels of analysis to
which they apply, both in terms of the grain of the unit (micro to macro) and its functional level
(neurological, cognitive, behavioral, social). We refer to these two together as “grain size” and
follow past researchers (Newell, 1990; Anderson, 2002) in using the time course of cognitive
processes to distinguish levels of analysis. The requirement of having an instructionally relevant
theory requires a grain size that is intermediate between existing theoretical concepts in
education and cognitive psychology.
Education theories have tended to use macro levels of analysis with units at large grain
sizes. For example, situated learning, following its origins as a general proposition about the
social-contextual basis of learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991), has been extended to an educational
hypothesis (e.g., Greeno, 1998). It tends to use a rather large grain size including groups and
environmental features as causal factors in performance and to focus on rich descriptions of case
studies. These features work against two important goals that we have: (1) Identifying
mechanisms of student learning that lead to instructional principles and (2) Communicating
instructional principles that are general over contexts and provide unambiguous guidelines to
instructional designers. We assume that learning is indeed situated, and understanding learning
environments, including social interaction patterns that support learning, is an important element
of a general theory. But we take the interaction between a learner and a specific instructional
environment as the unit of analysis.
Learning theories have small grain sizes as well. At the neural level, variations on Hebb’s
idea (Hebb, 1949) of neuronal plasticity refer to a basic mechanism of learning, often expressed
simplistically as “neurons that fire together, wire together”. This idea has been captured by
neural network models of learning mechanisms that use multi-level networks (e.g., O’Reilly &
Munakata, 2000). Micro-level theories also give accounts of elementary causal events by using
symbols, rules, and operations on basic entities expressed as computer code, as in the ACT-R
theory of Anderson (1993). Although initially developed without attention to biology, ACT-R
has been tested and extended using brain imaging data (e.g., Anderson et al., 2004). It is
important for the learning sciences that such theories demonstrate the ability to predict and
explain human cognition at a detailed level that is subject to empirical testing. The small grain
size of such theories and the studies that support them leave them mostly untested at the larger
grain size of knowledge-rich academic learning. Thus, they tend to be insufficient to constrain
instructional design choices.
The level of explanation we target is intermediate to the larger and smaller grain sizes
exemplified above. This level must contain propositions whose scope is observable entities
related to instructional environments and learner characteristics that affect learning. These
propositions must be testable by experiments and allow translation both downward to microlevel mechanisms and upward to classroom practices. The theoretical framework we describe in
section 2 uses this intermediate cognitive level, which we refer to as the Learning Event level.
First, we briefly describe a research context for theory development.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 5

1.3. Generalizations and constraints
Among many factors that can limit the application of even principles backed by solid
evidence are two that are especially important for the application of principles to educational
settings: Variations among subject matter domains and among students. The content of a domain
is a specific challenge to a general learning principle. Physics is not the same as history, and
neither is the same as language. Our approach is to develop a domain-independent framework for
characterizing knowledge structures that in turn captures differences in the structure of content
knowledge across domains. Thus the KLI framework is domain-independent in its general
structure and domain-sensitive at the level of the knowledge components that are central to its
deeper analysis of learning. This allows the framework to cover multiple academic content areas
so that generalizations and limits on generalizations become visible.
Variation in student characteristics is a more complex challenge. Because studies must be
done with students in specific school and social-geographical settings, strong generalizations
demand new studies beyond the original samples. We draw primarily from studies at the junior
high school through college levels in K12 Schools and University settings. However, every
theoretical proposition and instructional principle derived from this research is an empirically
testable hypothesis for other populations.
We address our goal of grounding our framework in application settings by emphasizing
research within actual courses and their students. We call this in vivo experimentation (e.g.,
Koedinger et al., 2009; Salden et al., 2008; see also learnlab.org/research/wiki). We address
challenges of different domains and student characteristics in terms of differences in knowledge
demands (section 3) and stage of learning (section 4 and 6).
2. The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework
Many efforts at instructional “theory” are really frameworks (e.g., Bloom, 1956; Gagne,
1985; Sweller, 1994; van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005) because they do not lead directly to
precise predictions. Nevertheless, a theoretical framework does entail a hypothesis-testing
research agenda:
“Frameworks are composed of the bold, general claims … They are sets of constructs
that define important aspects of [interest] … Frameworks, however, are insufficiently
specified to enable predictions to be derived from them, but they can be elaborated, by
the addition of assumptions, to make them into theories, and it is these theories that
generate predictions. A single framework can be elaborated into many different theories.”
Anderson (1993, p. 2)
The propositions within the KLI framework can help generate research questions within specific
domains and instructional situations that, with further work, yield precise and falsifiable
predictions. However, our main goal here is to identify the broad constructs and claims that serve
more specific instantiations. We pursue this goal by specifying three taxonomies, kinds of
knowledge, kinds of learning processes, and kinds of instructional choices, and dependencies
between them. We show how kinds of knowledge constrain learning processes and how these
processes constrain which instructional choices will be optimal in producing robust student
learning. Learning is robust when it lasts over time (long-term retention), transfers to new
situations that differ from the learning situation along various dimensions (e.g., material content,
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 6

setting, cf., Barnett & Ceci, 2002; Chen & Klahr, 2008), or accelerates future learning in new
situations (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999).

Figure 1. Instructional Events are (usually planned) variations in the learning environment that cause Learning
Events. Learning events are unobservable processes that cause unobservable changes in Knowledge
Components and can be effected by existing knowledge. Knowledge Components cause student performances,
which can be observed in Assessment Events. Examples of instructional and assessment events are shown, with
some being only instructional (e.g., an explanation), some only assessment (e.g., an exam), and some both (e.g.,
a step taken by a student in an intelligent tutoring system).

2.1. Learning Events, Instructional Events, Assessment Events
The KLI framework relates a set of observable and unobservable events: Learning
Events, Instructional Events, and Assessment Events, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Instructional and
Assessment Events are observable activities in or changes to the instructional environment
controlled by an instructor, instructional designer, or experimenter. Instructional Events, which
are intended to produce learning (they cause Learning Events), can be observed in a lesson from
a 10-second episode on a computer to a series of didactic moves by a teacher or computer tutor.
Assessment Events involve student responses that are evaluated. Some are instructional; some
are not. Although assessment events are usually test items, they can also be embedded in the
context of instruction, for instance, tracking whether a student is correct on their first attempt in a
tutored problem-solving scenario (e.g., Aleven, Roll, McLaren, & Koedinger, 2010; Feng,
Heffernan, & Koedinger, 2009). Learning Events are essentially changes in cognitive and brain
states that can be inferred from data, but cannot be directly observed or directly controlled.
Learning processes and knowledge changes are inferred from assessments at both immediate and
remote time points (long-term retention, future learning) and in tasks (transfer, future learning)
that may differ from those during instruction. Each of the three central events is decomposable,
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 7

both temporally and structurally. Temporally, instructional sequences contain event segments
that vary from less than 1 second (e.g., exposure to a printed word) and a little more than a
second (e.g., a fact retrieval task with instructional feedback) to a few minutes (e.g., turns in a
classroom dialogue around the concept of an integer). Structurally, we decompose the cognitive
changes that arise from these Instructional Events into Knowledge Components. Learning Events
produce Knowledge Components and the acquisition and modification of these components is
the KLI framework’s explanation for consistency in student performance and transfer across
related Assessment Events.
The arrows in Fig. 1 represent inferences about causal links to the unobservables
(knowledge changes and the Learning Events that produce them) from the observables
(Instructional and Assessment Events). Unobservable Knowledge Components (KCs) can be
inferred by comparing performances exhibited by different kinds of Assessment Events (“tasks”
or “items”). For example, by contrasting student performance on assessment tasks that presented
algebra problems in words versus matched equations, Koedinger and Nathan (2004) identified
components of knowledge that students particularly struggle to acquire. In contrast to teachers’
beliefs, beginning algebra students performed worse on equations than word problems and this
contrast led the researchers to infer that students have greater knowledge deficits for
comprehending algebraic expressions than corresponding English sentences. In cases like these,
instructors may incorrectly treat knowledge and its acquisition as directly observable, not
requiring empirically based inference, and conclude equations are easier than word problems
because it looks like equations are simpler.
The typical instructional experiment, in KLI terms, explores how variations in
Instructional Events affect performance on subsequent Assessment Events. The interpretation of
such experiments may involve inferences about mediating Learning Events and KC changes. As
an example, we can explain results of Aleven and Koedinger (2002) in these terms. They found
that adding prompts for self-explanation to tutored problem solving practice (without adding
extra instructional time) produced greater explanation ability and conceptual transfer to novel
problems while maintaining performance on isomorphic problems. In KLI terms, changing
instruction from pure practice to practice with self-explanation (kinds of Instructional Events)
engaged more verbally mediated explanation-based learning in addition to non-verbal induction
(kinds of Learning Events) and thus produced more verbal declarative knowledge in addition to
non-verbal procedures (kinds of KCs). KC differences were inferred from the observed contrast
in student performance on isomorphic problem solving test items compared with conceptual
transfer test items (kinds of Assessment Events). These results require an explanation that
appeals to KCs: The groups perform the same when assessment tasks allow either kind of
knowledge (verbal declarative or non-verbal procedural), but only the self-explainers do well on
the transfer tasks that require just verbal declarative knowledge.
We generalize such examples for linking knowledge to learning and instruction by
specifying taxonomies of knowledge (section 3), learning (section 4), and instruction (section 5).
Taxonomies have value when classification supports scientific analysis. In the case of the KLI
framework, taxonomies are used to make more visible dependencies between the kinds of
knowledge to be learned, the learning processes that produce knowledge changes, and the
instructional options that affect robust learning.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 8

Examples of possible dependencies have been suggested in the literature. Rohrer and
Taylor (2006) summarize a meta-analysis of spacing effects (Donovan & Radosevich, 1999)
with “the size of the spacing effect declined sharply as conceptual difficulty of the task increased
from low (e.g., rotary pursuit) to average (e.g., word list recall) to high (e.g., puzzle).” Wulf and
Shea (2002) suggest that “situations with low processing demands [simple skills] benefit from
practice conditions that increase the load and challenge the performer, whereas practice
conditions that result in extremely high load [complex skills] should benefit from conditions that
reduce the load to more manageable levels”. These indications of dependencies between
knowledge acquisition goals and effective learning and instruction illustrate the gain in
conceptual clarity that may come from a systematic articulation of kinds of knowledge, learning,
and instruction that provides the basis for exploring how they interrelate.
It is useful to consider whether such taxonomies can help explain why opposing
recommendations for optimal instruction remain in the literature. One such opposition contrasts
recommendations for instruction that increases demands on students so as to produce “desirable
difficulties” (e.g., Schmidt & Bjork, 1992; Roediger & Karpicke, 2006; Cepeda et al., 2006) with
recommendations for instruction that decreases demands on students so as to reduce extraneous
“cognitive load” (e.g., van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005). KLI can be used to help generate
hypotheses for how this opposition may be resolved based on differences in the kinds of KCs,
kinds of Learning Events (LE), or kinds of Assessment Events (AE) on which these research
paradigms focus. Research supporting desirable difficulties has tended to focus on fact
knowledge (a kind of KC), memory processes (a kind of LE), and long-term retention tests (a
kind of AE) to argue in favor of instructional approaches such as increased test-like practice
(Roediger & Karpicke, 2006) and mixed or spaced practice (Schmidt & Bjork, 1992). Cognitive
load research has tended to focus on rule or schema knowledge (kinds of KCs), induction or
compilation processes (kinds of LEs), and transfer tests (a kind of AE) to argue in favor of
instructional approaches such as increased study of examples (Renkl, 1997). KLI provides a
frame for 1) noticing contradictions in instructional recommendations and 2) pursuing whether
the resolution lies within differences in the kinds of knowledge being addressed, in the kinds of
learning processes being evoked (LEs), or in the nature of the assessment strategies (AEs) being
employed.
Articulating potential dependencies among kinds of knowledge, learning, and instruction
requires a stipulation of those kinds. Such articulation suggests a variety of open research
questions that go beyond the open issues that motivated our creation of the KLI framework.
3. Knowledge: Decomposing Task Complexity and Transfer
Others have argued for the importance for educational design of analyzing learning goals into
components of knowledge (e.g., diSessa, 1993; Minstrell, 2001). Anderson and Schunn (2000)
suggested “there is a real value for an effort that takes a target domain, analyzes it into its
underlying knowledge components, … communicates these components, and monitors their
learning”. Although cognitive task analysis to design instruction has been demonstrated to be
effective in a number of training domains (e.g., Clark, Feldon, van Merriënboer, Yates, & Early,
2007; Lee, 2003), it has not been a common approach for designing academic instruction.
Cognitive task analysis remains as much an art as a science, in part because of the unobservable
nature of knowledge and limited scientific tools for characterizing it at a useful level of analysis.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 9

Thus, we think an effort toward defining a taxonomy of kinds of Knowledge Components is
worthwhile and can be useful even without costly implementation of computational models that
has been the traditional approach of cognitive science.

We define a Knowledge Component (KC) as an acquired unit of cognitive function or
structure that can be inferred from performance on a set of related tasks. These tasks are the
Assessment Events of the KLI framework (see Fig. 1). As a practical matter, we use “Knowledge
Component” broadly to generalize across terms for describing pieces of cognition or knowledge,
including production rule (e.g., Newell, 1990; Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), schema (e.g., van
Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005; Gick & Holyoak, 1983), misconception (e.g., Clement, 1987), or
facet (e.g., Minstrell, 2001), as well as everyday terms such as concept, principle, fact, or skill
(cf. Bloom, 1986). Many KCs describe mental processes at about the unit task level within
Newell’s (1990) time scales of human action (see Table 1). Unit tasks last about 10 seconds and
are essentially the leaf nodes or smallest steps in the decomposition of a reasoning task – that is,
the application of a single operator in a problem solving space (e.g., applying a theorem in a
geometry proof). Unit tasks are at the interface between what Newell called the “cognitive band”
and “rational band”. Scientific investigation at these time scales is critical to make productive
bridges between neuroscience research within the biological band, where attention is on
millisecond changes, and educational research within the social band, where attention is on
changes occurring over months.
A range of unit task times are illustrated in Fig. 2, which shows a sample of three
learning curves of student performance in language and math domains. Each curve displays the
average time it takes students to correctly apply a single KC across successive opportunities
during tutored problem solving. Application time for each KC systematically decreases as the
KC is further refined and strengthened. Comparing the three curves illustrates the variability in
average time to correctly apply KCs across the examples from three different domains--Chinese
vocabulary, English articles, and geometric areas. But rather than assuming such variability is
intrinsic to a whole domain, the working assumption of our framework is that such variability is
associated with specific KCs. The prototypical KCs in Fig. 2 are drawn from different types as
elaborated in Tables 2 and 3 and discussed below. Distinguishing properties of KCs is part of a
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 10

deep analysis of domain knowledge, and thus a powerful source for innovative instructional
design.

Figure 2. Performance time learning curves for three different kinds of knowledge components (KCs) show
how more complex KCs take longer to perform than less complex KCs. The data come from student use of
computer tutors for High School Geometry, College English as a Second Language, and College Chinese and
are available from DataShop (http://pslcdatashop.org). The curves show the time for a correct performance of a
KC (averaged across students and KCs) on successive opportunities to perform and learn that KC (the x-axis).
Each opportunity is an Assessment Event, because the tutor observes and record students’ success, and an
Instructional Event, because students get correctness feedback and as-needed instruction.

KCs that function in a given task are hierarchical, thus posing a problem of how to target
the right components for a given learning situation. For example, sentence comprehension relies
on word identification, which relies on letter recognition and trigonometry relies on geometry,
which relies on multiplication. Because the KLI framework targets the analysis of academic
learning, our strategy is to focus on knowledge that is to be acquired by students in a given
academic course. This general strategy leads to a more specific one, to focus on the component
level at which the novice student makes errors. Thus, within a hierarchy of components, a
knowledge analysis for a particular course may focus only on a single level that lies just above
the level at which novices have achieved success and fluency. KC descriptions at the target level
(e.g., word identification or geometry) can treat lower levels (e.g., letter identification or
multiplication) as atomic under the empirical constraint that the target population has mastered
the lower leveli.

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 11

3.1 Kinds of Knowledge Components (KCs)
KCs can be characterized in terms of various properties that cut across domains to capture
their functioning in Learning Events. Time scale is one property we have already noted.
Conditions of applications and the student response to an Assessment Event are others. Table 2
illustrates the properties of application conditions and responses for examples across three
domains.ii Some KCs are applied under unvarying, constant conditions, while others are applied
under variable conditions. A KC has a constant condition when there is a single unique pattern
to which the KC applies and a variable condition when there are multiple patterns to which it
applies (e.g., a feature or features that can take on many different values). Paired associates
(e.g., Roediger & Karpicke, 2006) and “examples” (e.g., Anderson, Fincham, & Douglass, 1997)
are constant condition KCs, whereas categories, rules, schemas, or principles are variable
condition KCs. Similarly, the response of a KC can be a single value or constant (e.g., a
category label) or it can vary as a function of the variable information extracted in the
conditioniii.
Table 2. Examples of different kinds of Knowledge Components in Second Language
Learning, Mathematics and Science
Domain /
Knowledge Category
2nd Language
Chinese vocabulary
English determiners
Plural English spellings

Application
Conditions

Response

Example

Constant
Variable
Variable

Constant
Constant
Variable

Chinese radical “日” => “sun” in English
Choose article for <Noun> & it is definite => use “the”
<Noun> ending <consonant> “y” =>
remove “y” from <Noun> & add “ies”

Mathematics
Rule from name
Rule from context
Solution planning

Constant
Variable
Variable

Constant
Constant
Variable

“circle area formula” = > “A=π*r2”
Find area of <Fig> & it is a circle => use “A=π*r2”
Find area of irregular shape made up of regular shapes
<S1> and <S2> => find area <S1> and <S2> and
combine

Science
Content fact
Categorize situation

Constant
Variable

Constant
Constant

Experimental design

Variable

Variable

“gravitational acceleration” => “g = 9.8/s2”
Find unit for <quantity>, a small volume => use
“milliliters”
Test hypothesis <Var1> causes <Var2> => run an
experiment that varies only <Var1> and nothing else
and measure differences in <Var2>

The condition-response format emphasizes that knowing is not just about knowing what or
knowing how, but knowing when. Indeed, learning the conditions of application of knowledge,
the “when”, may be more difficult than learning possible responses, the “what” (cf., Chi,
Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Zhu, Lee, Simon & Zhu, 1996).
For purposes of first approximation, these properties define a useful (if perhaps
incomplete) notion of “complexity.” KCs that have variable conditions of application, variable
conditions of response, and operate on a longer time scale can be said to be more complex than
KCs that are constant in application or response and at a shorter time scale. To illustrate a
relatively simple KC, consider learning the meaning of the Chinese radical 日. An English
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 12

language learner acquires the connection between this form and the English word “sun.” The
implementation of this KC then is that, given 日and the goal of generating an English translation
(the conditions), produce “sun.” While knowledge may well be non-symbolic in its brain-based
implementation, for purposes of scientific analysis, we describe KCs in a symbolic format (e.g.,
English or computer code).
As illustrated in Table 3, our knowledge taxonomy makes four key distinctions (the first
two have been introduced above): the generality of the conditions of application, the generality
of the response, whether the KC is verbal or not, and the extent to which the KC can be
rationalized. In the Chinese KC example above, the application condition (the Chinese radical
日) is a constant and the response (sun) is a constant. The relationship is verbal (i.e., students
express it in words), and while a few radicals may have iconic value, the relationship generally
has no rationale, instead being a writing conventioniv. Non-language examples of “constantconstant” KCs are shown in Table 2, as are examples of KCs with variable conditions and/or
variable responses. As indicated in the last column of Table 3 (second row), constant-constant
KCs are commonly called “facts.” The labels in Table 3 (facts, categories, rules, etc) are rough
mappings to commonly used terms (cf. Gagne, 1985) and not necessarily one-to-one with the
cells in this taxonomy.
Table 3. Some Basic Knowledge Component Categories
Application
Response Relationship Rationale
Labels
conditions
constant
constant
non-verbal
no
association
constant
constant
verbal
no
fact
variable
variable

constant
constant

non-verbal
verbal

no
no

category
concept

variable

variable

non-verbal

no

variable

variable

verbal

no

production,
schema, skill
rule, plan

variable

variable

verbal

yes

principle,
rule, model

3.1.1. Constant-Constant KCs. Whether the conditions and response of KCs are constants
or variables is associated with the broad kinds of learning processes (e.g., memory,
categorization, induction) that have been studied. Learning research that emphasizes memory
(e.g., Schmidt & Bjork, 1992; Cepeda et al., 2006; Roediger & Karpicke, 2006) has primarily
focused on constant-constant KCs and these are often assessed with “paired associate” tasks. For
example, instructional recommendations derived from research on spacing and testing effects
(Pashler et al., 2007) have tended to emphasize constant-constant KCs with tasks such as math
fact recall (e.g., 8x5=40 in a study of spaced practice; Rea & Modigliani, 1985).
These relatively simple “associations” or “facts” (see Table 3) are pervasive in academic
learning, such as vocabulary facts in second-language learningv. Similar KCs are essential in
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 13

middle school, high school and post-secondary mathematics and science, particularly, definitions
of terms. For instance, “Pi ( ) is the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter” represents
a constant-constant KC in math that relates a term to its definition. These tend to be relatively
minor components in post-elementary mathematics, but they can be significant barriers to
learning. For example, student performance in the ASSISTment computer tutoring system
(Feng, Heffernan, & Koedinger, 2009) reveals that errors in simple fraction multiplication word
problems (e.g., “What is 3/4 of 1/2?”) are sometimes not about the math, but about vocabulary –
follow-up questions indicate that students make more errors on “What does ‘of’ indicate?”
(where multiply is one of four operator choices) than on “what is ¾ times ½?”.
We emphasize that all KCs, even these simple facts, are not directly observable and
multiple Assessment Events (AEs) are needed to infer whether or not a student has robustly
acquired a KC. Variability in the timing of AEs and the kinds of performance metrics used are
important. Success on an AE immediately after instruction provides evidence of some initial
acquisition of a KC, but is weaker evidence of robust learning than success on a delayed AE (cf.
Cepeda et al., 2006). Accuracy in performance does not guarantee acquisition of fluency, but
AEs that provide timing data or assess accuracy in time limited contexts would (cf., de Jong &
Perfetti, 2011).
3.1.2 Variable-Constant KCs. While memory research has emphasized constant-constant
KCs, research on conceptual and perceptual category learning (Medin & Schaffer, 1978) and
artificial grammar rule learning (Frank & Gibson, 2011) has primarily focused on variableconstant KCs, which are essentially category-recognition rules with many-to-one mappings.
English article selection is an example of this type: “to construct a noun phrase with a unique
referent, use the article ‘the’” (e.g., “The moon …”). Such categorical or classification
knowledge exists in mathematics as well, for instance, any expression that indicates the quotient
of two quantities is a fractionvi. Other examples of variable-constant KCs are given in Table 2.
That some knowledge can be used in (or generalizes across) a variety of different situations is
reflected in KLI by KCs that have variable conditions.
3.1.3 Variable-Variable KCs. Research that emphasizes more complex rule or schema
structure learning and transfer (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Sweller & Chandler, 1994) has
primarily focused on variable-variable KCs. These KCs map one relational structure (Gentner,
et al., 2009) to another and variables are used to express the many possible arguments to those
relations. An example in second language learning is a rule for generating an English plural: To
form the plural of a singular noun <N> ending in an “s” sound or a “z” sound, form the word
<N> “es”. In mathematics and science, KCs that apply formulas to solve problems have a
variable-variable structure: To find the area of a triangle with height <H> and base <B>,
multiply <H> * <B> * 1/2. Other math and science examples of variable-variable KCs are
shown in Table 2.
Variety in task contexts is needed to infer acquisition of variable condition KCs from
Assessment Events. Just because a second language English student correctly selects “an” in
“[a/an] orange” does not ensure the student has learned a (variable-constant) KC with the right
generality (Wylie et al., 2009). They may or may not have (implicitly) induced a KC for which
“the noun begins with a vowel” is a condition. Variety in assessment tasks, such as “[a/an]
honor”, is needed to infer the student has learned the correct condition, “the noun begins with a
vowel sound”. Aleven and Koedinger (2002) illustrate the use of a variety of assessments to
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 14

disambiguate KCs with incorrectly generalized conditions (“angles that look equal => are
equal”) from KCs with correctly generalized conditions (e.g., “base angles of an isosceles
triangle => are equal”).
3.1.4 Non-verbal vs. verbal KCs. Some KCs represent associations, perceptual
categories, skills, or procedures that cannot be readily verbalized (cf., Alibali & Koedinger,
1999; Dienes & Perner, 1999). Other KCs represent concepts, procedures, principles or theories
that learners can readily verbalize. The KLI distinction between verbal and non-verbal is similar
(but not identicalvii) to the ACT-R distinction between declarative and procedural knowledge
(Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), which has been influential in instructional design (e.g., Koedinger
& Aleven, 2007). The ACT-R distinction is about unobservable cognitive mechanisms,
emphasizing whether or not knowledge can be accessed by other knowledge (declarative can,
procedural cannot). The KLI distinction is about observable behavior, emphasizing whether
students can “do” but not explain (indicating non-verbal knowledge), explain but not do
(indicating “inert” verbal knowledge), or do and explain (indicating both non-verbal and verbal
knowledge).
One reason to emphasize this distinction derives from the observation that much of what
experts know is only in non-verbal or “implicit” form (Posner, in press). Much language
knowledge (e.g., English article selection) is non-verbal – English speakers can converse
effectively and fluently, but most either cannot explain their choices at all or cannot do so to a
reasonable standard of coherence. Non-verbal knowledge is common in math too; for example,
students may be able to accurately recognize which expressions are fractions, but not articulate
how they do so. Aleven and Koedinger (2002) provide evidence of non-verbal procedural
knowledge in the performance of geometry students who were more correct on making
geometric inferences than they were on matched explanation items. A mathematical model of
their data provides evidence that non-verbal procedural and verbal declarative knowledge of the
same content can co-exist and that different mixtures of such knowledge can yield identifiable
patterns of performance across multiple assessments.
Because experts cannot directly access or articulate many aspects of what they know,
they are susceptible to “expert blind spot” (Koedinger & Nathan, 2004). Instructors and
designers may thus underemphasize or even completely overlook non-verbal knowledge in their
instructional delivery or design. The pervasiveness of non-verbal visual or procedural knowledge
is one reason why Cognitive Task Analysis is so powerful in improving instruction (Clark et al.,
2007).
Verbal instruction is intrinsically bound to learning verbal KCs. Moreover, even in tasks
involving substantial non-verbal knowledge, the verbal articulation of knowledge (by teacher,
textbook, tutor, or student) can enhance learning. It is not well enough understood when
explanations (intended to produce verbal KCs) should be given to or elicited from students to
best enhance their learning (cf. Renkl et al., 1998). Much research on “self-explanation”
indicates that prompting students to provide verbal explanations of actions (whether their own or
ones given in a worked example) can often aid robust learning (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002; Chi
et al., 1994; Graesser, McNamara, & VanLehn, 2005; Hausmann & VanLehn, 2007). Although
verbalization during mainly perceptual tasks can sometimes interfere with learning (Schooler et
al., 1997), verbalization in such tasks can also be supportive (Fox & Charness, 2009). In some
situations, the support provided for verbalization is offset by the additional instructional time it
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 15

requires (Wylie et al., 2009). These somewhat ambiguous conclusions may reflect variations in
the specific Instructional Events and the target learning. The KC taxonomy may help
differentiate positive and negative results of the effects of verbalization, including prompting for
self-explanations. The negative results tend to involve variable-constant KCs in domains where
non-verbal acquisition is sufficient, whereas the positive results involve variable-variable KCs in
domains where verbal KCs (as well as non-verbal KCs) are learning objectives (e.g., students are
expected to be able to express mathematical theorems and scientific principles).
One reason why educators in some domains value verbal articulation of rules and
principles is that, once expressed, they are available for rational argument. How much
rationalization can be done around a KC is a topic we discuss next.
3.1.5 Connective tissue -- KCs with and without rationales. While some “rules” or
“principles” clearly have a rationale, such as theorems in mathematics, other “rules” may reflect
regularities of seemingly arbitrary conventions, as in some English spelling rules. The
availability of rationales should be considered as graded rather than all or none and dependent on
the depth of theory development in a domain.
The rules for creating plurals are relatively difficult to rationalize insofar as different
languages have different ways to create plurals. These rules gain some rationale within the
constraints of a given language, but they remain largely opaque to everyday usageviii. Other KCs
have rationales grounded in nature. The formula for the area of a triangle is a provable regularity
of Euclidean spaces that are approximated in the real world. However, just as a skilled language
user will not know the rationales for plurals, the successful geometry student may not understand
the rationale for the area of a triangle.
The rationale feature of KCs is relevant in considering whether certain forms of
instruction, such as collaborative argumentation or discovery learning, will be effective for a
particular kind of KC. The rationale of a KC can support sense-making strategies and be used to
reconstruct a partially forgotten KC, adapt it to unfamiliar situations, or even construct a KC
from scratch. Instruction that involves students in explicitly discovering KCs from data or
deriving KCs through argumentation may be productive for KCs with a rationale, but not for
ones without.
3.2 Integrative Knowledge Components and other complexity factors
Beyond the basic KC taxonomy illustrated in Tables 2 and 3 are some additional features
of KCs that have significance for learning and instruction. Integrative knowledge (e.g., Case &
Okamoto, 1996; Slotta & Chi, 2006), prerequisite conceptual and perceptual knowledge (e.g.,
Booth & Koedinger, 2008), probabilistic knowledge (e.g., Frishkoff, Pavlik, Levin, & de Jong,
2008), and shallow or incorrect knowledge including misconceptions (e.g., Aleven & Koedinger,
2002; Chi et al., 1981; Clement, 1987; Minstrell, 2001) are among the important knowledge
complexities that have been made visible in learning research.
KCs sometimes are not inferable from a single behavioral pattern, but only from
behavioral patterns across task situations varying in complexity. We call such a component an
“integrative Knowledge Component” because it integrates or must be integrated (or connected)
with other KCs to produce behavior. Descriptions of integrative KCs make reference to internal
mental states either in their condition (e.g., a deep feature produced by another KC) or in their
response (e.g., a subgoal for another KC to achieve). A typical strategy for inferring an
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 16

integrative component uses a subtraction logic that takes the differences between two tasks of
overlapping complexity as implicating an integrative KC. For example, Heffernan and
Koedinger (1997) found students were significantly worse at translating two-step algebra story
problems into expressions (e.g., 800-40x) than they were at translating two closely matched onestep problems (with answers 800-y and 40x). They hypothesized that many students are missing
an integrative KC that is necessary to solve the two-step problems, namely a recursive grammar
rule indicating expressions (e.g., 40x) can be embedded within other expressions (e.g., 800-40x).
Instruction specifically designed to address learning of this KC significantly improved student
performance (Koedinger & McLaughlin, 2010).
For integrative knowledge, non-verbal forms of instruction (e.g., example study, repeated
practice) may not be optimal for effective induction and refinement. Providing and eliciting
explanations may be critical to help learners break down or externalize the complex inference
needed when processing negative feedback to fully identify all the KCs and integrative KCs in a
reasoning chain and to revise any KCs that are not correct as part of that chain (cf. MacLaren &
Koedinger, 2002).
Estimating and Measuring KC Complexity. Informally, complexity reflects the condition
encoding requirements and the response requirements of the task (e.g., how many coding
operations on perceptual stimulus are needed; how many response operations). However, the
knowledge taxonomy captures additional possibilities: KCs with variable conditions or responses
tend to be more complex than those with constant conditions or responses. Knowing a KC both
verbally and non-verbally is more complex than knowing it just non-verbally. And knowing the
rationale of a KC as well as the KC itself is more complex than knowing a KC without a
rationale.
Beyond these informal approximations, we have two ways to ground and estimate KC
complexity. The first is a simple heuristic: Simply put, the more complex the description of the
KC, the more complex is the KC, following a general definition of complexity as description
length (Rissanen, 1978).ix The ideal description language for KCs is a formal cognitive modeling
language such as an ACT-R production system (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) or structure
mapping theory (Gentner et al., 2009). But, KC descriptions in English may also serve this
purpose particularly when closely guided by empirical cognitive task analysis methods such as
think alouds or difficulty factors assessments (Koedinger & Terao, 2002; Rittle-Johnson &
Koedinger, 2001). Neither approach is guaranteed, but reasonable predictions are possible.
Employing description length with the KC descriptions in Table 2 suggests that constantconstant KCs in the three domains tend to be simpler (9, 6, and 6 words) than variable-constant
KCs (11, 12, and 10 words), which are simpler than variable-variable KCs (12, 21, and 21
words).
A second grounding of KC complexity is empirical: the difficulty students have in
applying the KC, one measure of which is the time it takes for students to correctly execute a
KC. In general, simpler KCs can be executed more quickly, as suggested by the learning curves
displayed in Fig. 2. In these curves the y-axis is the average time for correct entries in computerbased tutoring systems for second-language and math learning. The average is for each student
on each KC in a particular unit of instruction. The x-axis shows the number of opportunities that
students have had to practice and learn these KCs. Each opportunity is both an Assessment
Event, whereby the system measures accuracy (whether or not the student is correct on first
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 17

attempt without a hint) and latency (how long to perform the action), and an Instructional Event,
whereby a correct action gets positive feedback, incorrect actions get substantive negative
feedback, and successively more detailed hints are provided at request. In general, students learn
with more opportunities and this relation is reflected in Fig. 2 where the curves go down,
indicating faster correct performance as opportunities increase.
Fig. 2 shows learning curves from a Chinese vocabulary unit, an English grammar unit on
use of articles, and a Geometry unit on area of figures. The Chinese Vocabulary unit involves
constant-constant KCs, for example, the Chinese character for “lao3shi1” translates as “teacher”.
Students’ correct performance of these KCs, which involves retrieving the correct response and
typing it in, takes about 3 to 6 seconds on average (see Fig. 2a). The English Article unit
involves variable-constant KCs, such as “if the referent of the target noun was previously
mentioned, then use ‘the.’” Students’ correct performance of these KCs, which involves
retrieving or reasoning to a correct response and selecting it from a menu, takes about 6 to 10
seconds (see Fig. 2b). The Geometry Area unit involves variable-variable KCs such as “if you
need to find the area of a circle with radius <R>, then compute 3.14 * <R> ^ 2”. These typically
involve retrieving or constructing the needed mathematical operations or formula and typing in
the arithmetic steps to be taken (e.g., 3.14*3^2) or the final result (e.g., 28.26). Correct reasoning
and entry takes about 10 to 14 seconds (see Fig. 2c). These examples illustrate the possibility of
supporting theoretically derived hypotheses about KC complexity (e.g., from KC category or
description length) with empirical results (e.g., time to execute the KC) – the variable condition
or action KCs with longer descriptions correspond with slower execution times.
3.3 Kinds of Knowledge Components Guide Assessment and Instructional Decisions
3.3.1 Kinds of KCs drive Assessment Event choices. Assessment Events (AEs), as we
have mentioned, need variability to support reliable inferences of student learning of KCs. First,
AEs need to assess long-term as well as short-term retention and fluency as well as accuracy.
Second, variety in task contexts is needed to assess whether generality has been achieved in
variable condition KCs. Third, factorial variations in AEs are needed to infer the presence and
level of acquisition of integrative KCs (which are usually variable-variable KCs).
Assessment of variable condition KCs requires multiple Assessment Events to determine
whether the condition acquired by the student is accurate in level of generality. Correct learning
depends not only on the nature of the correct target KC, but also on the context of alternative
interpretations that students acquire from instruction (e.g., worked examples or text descriptions
of rules). Students may acquire overspecialized conditions, like the statistics students in Chang
(2006) who (implicitly) induce rules such as “if you want to display demographic data, use a pie
chart” rather than “if you want do display data <V> and <V> is categorical, then use a pie chart”.
Multiple assessment tasks that vary surface details can detect KCs with overspecialized
conditions.
Alternatively, students may acquire incorrectly generalized conditions, as in our previous
example of a student who learns that “an” rather than “a” is used when the first letter of the
following noun is a vowel. This rule is consistent with most cases, but fails when applied to
“honor.” In geometry, many students (implicitly) induce a rule that when angles look equal in a
diagram, they are equal (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002). There are no sure fire methods to
anticipate likely student misconceptions like these (simulated students notwithstanding, Matsuda
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 18

et al., 2008), so a sampling of a wide variety of assessment tasks are needed along with detailed
error analysis.
Assessment of integrative KCs requires a different form of variety. Since integrative
KCs work with other supporting KCs, they need to be assessed a combination of harder tasks
that require the hypothesized integrative KC and easier tasks that require the supporting KCs but
not the integrative KC. The logic of inference in its simplest form assumes that the probability
of knowing the integrative KC (Pi) is independent of the probability of knowing the supporting
KC (Ps). In that case, Pi can be found dividing success rate on the hard task (Pi * Ps) by success
rate on the easier task (Ps). This essential logic and a logistic regression generalization of it have
been successfully employed to identify integrative KCs for symbolic solution composition
(Koedinger & McLaughlin, 2010) and for problem decomposition planning (Stamper &
Koedinger, 2011).
3.3.2 Kinds of KCs drive Instructional Event choices. The differentiation of knowledge
types has implications for the effectiveness of an instructional principle. A key motivation of the
knowledge taxonomy is that its distinctions may help resolve apparent contradictions among
instructional recommendations. A related KLI assumption is that many learning processes and
instructional design decisions are not restricted to a domain as whole, but are determined by the
type of KCs being learned (cf. Sweller & Chandler, 1994; Wulf & Shea, 2002). While some KCs
(e.g., constant-constant KCs) may be prevalent in certain domains (e.g., second language
vocabulary learning), instructional principles should refer to KCs rather than to domains. A
hypothetical principle “drill and practice is not effective for mathematics” is at the wrong level
of analysis because it does not describe what it is about mathematics that makes drill and practice
unsuitable. There are also aspects of math learning (e.g., non-verbal knowledge of the grammar
of algebra, Koedinger and McLaughlin, 2010) where pure practice may be an ideal choice.
Similarly, while language learning often benefits from repetition (e.g., vocabulary), other aspects
of second language learning (e.g., pragmatics or intercultural competence) may benefit from a
combination of dialogue, explanation, and practice (cf. Ogan, Aleven, & Jones, 2009).
Rather than associate optimal instructional choices with domains (as disparate literatures
on math education, physics education, reading, and second language learning are wont to do), the
KLI framework suggests that instructional choices depend on the kinds of KCs being targeted.
Some of these will be domain specific and some will not. We offer below some tentative
hypotheses that link instructional choices to our taxonomy of KCs. Each hypothesis has some
support in the research literature and the complete set reflects an overarching hypothesis that the
optimal complexity of student behavior in an instructional event is correlated with the
complexity of the underlying learning event (see section 5.4). But all these hypotheses require
further testing.
Simpler constant-constant KCs (e.g., historical facts, vocabulary, see Table 2) and nonverbal, probabilistic variable condition KCs (e.g., perceptual categories, simple concepts and
skills) may imply instructional approaches that emphasize recall (Roediger & Karpicke,
2006), spacing of practice (Cepeda et al., 2006), tutored practice (e.g., Corbett & Anderson,
2001) and optimized scheduling of practice (Pavlik, 2007).
More complex variable-variable KCs (e.g., designing a controlled experiment, see Table 2)
imply instruction that includes comparison/blocking (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Gentner, et al.,
2009) and more worked example study (Sweller & Cooper, 1985).
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 19

Integrated variable-variable KCs to be learned in both non-verbal procedural and verbal
declarative form (e.g., math and science principles) imply instruction that prompts for selfexplanations (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002).
KCs with rationales (i.e., are not conventions, but reflect discoverable principles) imply
instruction that includes classroom argumentation and instructional dialogues (Michaels,
O’Connor, & Resnick, 2008).
The various instructional recommendations seem mutually incompatible without the taxonomy.
They would reflect “education wars:” More worked example study is at odds with more testing
of recall, blocked comparison of examples is at odds with spacing, pure non-verbal practice is at
odds with prompts for self-explanation and extended classroom dialogue and argumentation.
The KC taxonomy does not resolve these debates and apparent contradictions, but provides a
path toward resolution suggesting possible knowledge-by-instruction interactions that
researchers can explore experimentally and theoretically. We turn now to explaining why the
taxonomy might provide guidance for instructional choices. The key idea is that KC categories
are tuned to Learning Events that must be supported by instruction aligned with those Learning
Events.
4. Learning: Toward a Taxonomy of Processes for Knowledge Acquisition and Improvement
For a simple taxonomy of Learning Events, we propose three very broad types of learning
processes as a starting point:
A. Memory and Fluency-building processes: Non-verbal learning processes involved in
strengthening memory and compiling knowledge, producing more automatic and
composed (“chunked”) knowledge. Fluency building can be conceived as making the
link between the condition and response of a KC more direct, more consistent, and more
resistant to interference as well as making the response execution faster.
B. Induction and Refinement processes: Non-verbal learning processes that improve the
accuracy of knowledge. They include perception, generalization, discrimination,
classification, categorization, schema induction, and causal induction. (We classify these
as nonverbal, because, although they are often supported by verbalizations, they do not
require it.) These processes modify the conditions (e.g., which specific conditions satisfy
the variable condition in a variable-constant or variable-variable KC) or response (e.g.,
which responses satisfy a variable response type KC). These processes refine a KC,
making it more accurate, appropriately general and discriminating.
C. Understanding and Sense-making processes: Explicit, verbally-mediated learning in
which students attempt to understand or reason. This includes comprehension of verbal
descriptions, explanation-based learning, scientific discovery, and verbal rule-mediated
deduction. Sense making can be conceived as linking non-verbal with verbal forms of
knowledge or a KC with its rationale.
Fig. 3 illustrates how these different learning processes can lead to different kinds of
knowledge changes and ultimately to measurable robust learning outcomes.

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 20

Figure 3. How different classes of learning processes change knowledge to yield different robust learning
outcomes.

The knowledge changes that result in robust learning are produced through the memory and
fluency building, induction and refinement, and understanding and sense-making processes we
have described above. There is no one-to-one mapping between these learning processes and
robust learning outcomes. For example, it is not the case that only sense making leads to transfer.
Accelerated future learning can include three very different learning processes: (1) learning how
to learn, i.e., acquiring general learning strategies that can be used for more effective learning in
a new domain; (2) acquiring deep concepts or foundational skills that facilitate learning in a new
domain; (3) increasing “cognitive head room” through fluency with core knowledge that leaves
more capacity for using that knowledge in new learning. An example of this cross-domain
accelerated learning comes from Hausmann and VanLehn (2007), who found that prompting
students to self-explain in a Physics unit on electricity led to accelerated learning in a later
magnetism unit. This effect may reflect (1) acquisition of a learning strategy (self-explanation),
(2) deeper learning of electricity concepts (e.g., electrical field principles) allowing better
learning of similar magnetism concepts (e.g., magnetic field principles), or (3) greater fluency
with core concepts and skills (e.g., elements of field equations) allowing more head room for
learning magnetism. In a follow up study, Hausmann et. al. (2009) contrasted two types of
explanation prompts in electrodynamics problems, justification-based prompts that focused on
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 21

the physics principle that justifies a step and meta-cognitive prompts that focused on how each
step relates to the student’s existing knowledge, and found that justification-based prompts
supported greater learning. This study did not examine transfer across topics, but suggests that
the transfer effects in the prior study reflected the acquisition of deep concepts more than
metacognitive learning or increased fluency.
4.1 Memory and Fluency building processes
The brain is continuously engaged in creating and strengthening connections between the
conditions and responses of KCs in use. Thus, memory strengthening operates throughout
learning from the initial formation of a KC to each time it is subsequently used. It operates on all
kinds of KCs from the simplest non-verbal constant-constant associations to the most complex
variable-variable schemas with verbal descriptions and rationales. Especially relevant for
instruction is that memory improves with increased frequency of exposure (implying practice –
Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), is more reflective of robust learning when recall rather than
recognition is required (implying a “testing effect” – Roediger & Karpicke, 2006), and when
practice is more widely distributed in time (implying a “spacing effect”– Cepeda et al., 2006).
Even after a KC is learned enough to produce accurate responses, memory and fluencybuilding processes continue, leading to fast and effortless performance. Two principle processes
underlying fluency gains are knowledge compilation (e.g., Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) and
memory strengthening (e.g., Logan, 1988). In compilation, an initial declarative encoding of KCs
is proceduralized into a directly executable form and chains of small KCs may be composed into
a single larger KC and producing more automatic processing (Schneider & Shifrin, 1977). In
strengthening, KCs become more accessible with repeated use, resulting in faster and more
reliable retrieval of KCs. Fluency is often considered only as a matter of specific skill
acquisition. However, it is important to test its possible role in accelerating future learning (see
the lower right cell in Fig. 3).
4.2 Induction and Refinement processes
Induction and refinement processes modify KCs, especially the conditions that control
the retrieval and application of knowledge. Like memory and fluency building processes,
induction and refinement processes function in both the initial construction of a KC and its
subsequent revision. These processes are relevant to Variable-Constant and Variable-Variable
KCs, modifying the condition part of KCs by adding missing relevant features (a
“discrimination”) or removing irrelevant features (a “generalization”). For instance, from
examples in which equal angles look equal in a diagram (e.g., an isosceles triangle ABC is
shown with base angle B = 70° and it is shown that base angle C = 70°), a geometry novice may
induce the KC: “If angles look equal, then they are equal” (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002). (This
induction may be done with little or no deliberate awareness.) Although this KC can yield correct
answers, it is incorrect and in need of refinement. Refinement can occur through learning
processes that remove the irrelevant feature “angles look equal” or add a relevant feature, such as
“angles opposite each other in crossing lines” or “angles that are base angles of an isosceles
triangle”.
Many specific kinds of induction and refinement learning mechanisms can be found in
the cognitive science and machine learning literatures. These include perceptual chunking (e.g.,
Gobet, 2005; Servan-Schreiber & Anderson, 1990), rule or schema induction and analogy (e.g.,
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 22

Frank & Gibson, 2011; Gentner, Loewenstein, Thompson, & Forbus, 2009; Gick & Holyoak,
1983), generalization (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003; Shepard, 1987), discrimination (e.g., Chang,
2006; McClelland, Fiez, & McCandliss, 2002; Richman, Staszewski, & Simon, 1995), errordriven learning (Ohlsson, 1996), classification and categorization (e.g., Blum & Mitchell, 1998;
Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Quilici & Mayer, 1996), and non-verbal explanation-based learning
(Mitchell, Keller, & Kedar-Cabelli, 1986).
While memory and fluency-building processes involve core mechanisms of the cognitive
architecture, induction and refinement processes make use of existing knowledge, as more
elemental KCs become part of the condition or response of a larger KC. These processes draw
on cognitive resources and take time to execute. Unlike the understanding and sense-making
processes, induction and refinement processes are non-verbal (though verbally-mediated sense
making may work in service of these processes). Learning from examples or “by experience”
may result in feature inductions or refinements that students cannot verbalize. For instance, first
language learners acquire the features for correct choice of articles, such as “a” and “the”,
without being able to articulate the explicit rules for article choice, although their learning is
produced by verbal events. Even second language learners, as well as math and science learners,
engage in such non-verbal feature induction and refinement (cf. Koedinger & Roll, in press;
Posner, in press). Non-verbal induction can lead to a situation in which students can correctly
perform mathematics (e.g., find a correct angle in a geometry problem by subtracting from 180°)
that they cannot explain (e.g., indicating that the target and given angle form a line; Aleven &
Koedinger, 2002).
4.3 Understanding and Sense-making processes.
Understanding and sense-making processes are robust learning strategies by which
students engage in higher-level, language-mediated thinking to create knowledge. They involve
explicit reasoning and include comprehension strategies, self-explanation, and social
argumentation. While sense making can focus on application conditions and responses, it can
also convert non-verbal relationships into verbal ones, thereby transforming constant-constant
associations into facts, variable-constant categories into concepts, and variable-variable
productions into rules (see Table 3). Similarly, when sense-making focuses on the rationale for a
feature-response relationship, it may transform variable-variable rules into principles.
Understanding and sense-making processes include explicit comprehension strategies
(e.g., Graesser et al., 2005; Kintsch, 1998; Palinscar & Brown, 1984), verbally-mediated selfexplanation (e.g., Ainsworth, & Loizou, 2003; Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann & Glaser, 1989;
Lewis, 1988; VanLehn, 1999), explicit hypothesizing and scientific discovery processes (Levine,
1966; Klahr & Dunbar, 1988), deductive proof (e.g., Stylianides & Stylianides, 2009), and
explicit argumentation or collaborative discourse (e.g., Asterhan & Schwarz, 2009). Although
understanding and sense making may operate in the early formation of knowledge, many
competencies (not just first language) emerge from non-verbal induction and only later may be
“understood” and articulated verbally. In contrast with the first two categories of learning
processes, understanding and sense-making processes are more deliberate, occurring when a
student chooses to engage in them. Unlike induction and refinement learning, for which verbal
explanations are largely inaccessible, understanding and sense making are explicitly supported
by language or external symbols (whether sub-vocalized, written, or spoken in social dialogue).
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 23

4.4 Knowledge and Learning Process Dependencies
A taxonomy of learning processes helps provide causal links between instructional methods and
changes in student knowledge. The KLI framework suggests there are likely to be important
dependencies between kinds of knowledge, learning processes, and choices of most effective
instructional methods. For example, fluency building processes may be most important for
learning simple constant-constant components without a rationale, whereas sense-making
processes may be most important for learning more complex variable-variable components that
have a rationale. Fluency-building processes may also be relevant for more complex Variable
condition components that may become inaccessible in long-term memory without appropriate
repetition. Similarly, refinement processes are also relevant for the kinds of complex integrated
and interconnected KCs (with rationales) produced by sense-making processes. These
observations suggest a potential asymmetry whereby simpler learning processes (fluency and
refinement) may support complex knowledge but complex learning processes (e.g.,
argumentation) may fail to support simple knowledge (e.g., arbitrary constant-constant
associations).
Table 4. Which learning processes are effective for which kinds of
Knowledge Components (KCs)
Understanding
& sense
making

Learning
Processes
(simpler
on bottom)

-

-

++

nothing to
explain

implicit rule
learning is
more efficient

principles must
be understood

-

++

+

Induction &
refinement

no
generalization
needed

rules must be
induced

principles can
be inert
without
associated
rules

++

+

+

Memory &
fluency
building

facts must be
memorized

rules (&
instances) must
be remembered
(dual paths may
help)
Rules
(variable
condition KCs)

principles must
be remembered,
but can be
reconstructed

Facts
(constantconstant KCs)

Principles
(verbal KCs
with a
rationale)

Knowledge Components
(simpler on left)
Table 4 relates three kinds of KCs to the three broad learning process categories. It
suggests an asymmetry in the relevance of learning processes to kinds of KCs. While all three
learning processes may be important for robust (and efficient) learning of more complex
principles and mental models (integrated verbal and non-verbal KCs with rationales), for the
simplest facts (constant-constant paired associates without rationales) memory and fluency
processes are more important than the other learning processes. We refer to this idea as the
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 24

asymmetry hypothesis, which we elaborate in the next section. For such KCs, there are no
variable conditions (generalizations) that need to be induced and refined and there are no
rationales to use to engage in understanding or sense making. Thus two minus signs appear in
the “Facts” column of Table 4. Similarly, for intermediate complexity rules (variable condition
KCs which need not be verbalized and do not have rationales), induction and refinement are
important but understanding and sense making may not be (cf. Wylie et al., 2009) – thus the
minus sign in the “Rules” column of Table 4.
On the other hand, humans sometimes fail to learn rules not because of failures in
induction, but failures in memory - as was nicely demonstrated recently by Frank and Gibson
(2011) in artificial grammar learning tasks. In other words, memory processes remain necessary
(and should be supported in optimal instruction) even for rules (see the single plus in Table 4).
The other single plus signs (in the last column) indicate hypotheses that memory and fluency
processes and induction and refinement processes are also important for learning principles – at
least for lasting retention of the verbal form of those principles and for accurate and fluent
performance of actions (generated by non-verbal procedures) corresponding with those
principles (e.g., quickly find the area of a circle as well as state the formula). These have single
rather than double plus signs in Table 4, because research is insufficient and there are opposing
views. For example, “memorization” (as might be supported by spacing of practice) may not be
(as) important for principles because interconnections with other knowledge may sufficiently
support retrieval (cf. Rohrer & Taylor, 2006).
In addition to the kind of KC, the stage of learning may also have implications for what
learning processes (and therefore what instructional choices) are relevant. For example, in
learning of a rule, inductive processes are critical for initial formation of the rule and refinement
for improvement, but then memory and fluency process are important to improve retrieval
reliability and application speed.
We turn next to examples of instructional principles based on experimental results that
support hypothesis-based instructional interventions in producing robust learning efficiency
outcomes. In section 6, we provide a more detailed analysis of one of these principles. Finally,
in section 7, we return to the issue of dependency and, in particular, hypothesize a general
relationship between KC types and instructional methods.
5. Instructional Principles and Hypotheses About their Effectiveness
The main question for this section is what kinds of Instructional Events yield robust learning in
an efficient way? We are concerned not only about robust learning outcomes, but the
instructional time required. We seek principles that achieve greater robust learning outcomes
without taking more time, that achieve equivalent robust learning in less time, or, most generally,
that increase the rate at which robust learning occurs. Table 5 shows a list of example
instructional principles from simplest to most complex, whereby we mean by “principle” a kind
of Instructional Event for which there is substantial evidence that it enhances robust learning
efficiency. The simplest, Spacing, Testing, and Optimized Scheduling, have tended to be used
with the simplest kinds of KCs, constant-constant facts. The most complex, Accountable Talk,
has tended to be used with the most complex kinds of KCs, verbal principles with rationales.
Our taxonomy of instruction follows directly from the taxonomy of learning and includes three
major kinds: 1) memory and fluency enhancing instruction, 2) induction and refinement
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 25

enhancing instruction, and 3) understanding and sense making enhancing instruction. We
describe some example principles in these three categories in more detail.
Table 5. Some examples of instructional principles in learning process categories and
roughly ordered from simpler to more complex.
Learning
Processes

Instructional Description
Principle
Spacing and Long-term retention of KCs is enhanced with longer intervals
between practice and when active recall is required (“tests” or
Memory &
Testing
“problems”)
Fluency
Optimized Selection of practice instances based on prior statistics and on
Scheduling each students’ experience with each target KC.
Providing an evaluative response (e.g., correct or incorrect) soon
Timely
Feedback after a students’ attempt at task or step
Induction
Instruction leads to more robust learning when it guides the
Feature
and
learner's attention ("focuses") to valid or relevant features of target
Focusing
Refinement
KCs
Students learn more efficiently and more robustly when more
Worked
Examples frequent study of worked examples is interleaved with problem
solving practice as opposed to practice that is all problem solving.
Prompted Encouraging students to explain to themselves parts of instruction
(steps in worked example or sentences in a text) yields more
SelfUnderExplanation robust learning than not prompting or providing such explanations
to students.
standing and
Sense
Accountable Teacher use of “talk moves”, particular question and response
Making
patterns which encourage students to be accountable to accurate
Talk
knowledge, rigorous reasoning, and the classroom community,
leads to more robust learning.

Example
References
Cepeda et al.
(2006)
Pavlik (2007)
Corbett &
Anderson (2001)
Dunlap et al.
(2011)
Sweller &
Cooper (1985)
Chi et al. (1994);
Haussmann &
VanLehn (2007)
Michaels,
O’Connor, &
Resnick (2008)

5.1 Memory and Fluency Enhancing Instruction
Spacing and Testing Effects. The spacing recommendation in the “Organizing
Instruction” practice guide (Pashler et al., 2007) suggests that spacing practice over longer time
intervals leads to better long-term retention than massing practice over shorter intervals (e.g.,
Cepeda et al., 2006). The testing recommendation (“use quizzing to promote learning”) from
that same guide suggests that long-term retention is enhanced by practice in recalling target
material more than by repeated studying of the same material (e.g., Roediger & Karpicke, 2006).
Optimized Scheduling. Optimizing scheduling is a more specific version of the spacing
principle and builds on Pavlik’s (2007) observation that much past research has not controlled
for time on task and thus has underestimated the benefit of shorter practice intervals early in KC
acquisition. This principle involves applying an instructional schedule that has been ordered to
optimize robust learning. More precisely, what is optimized is instructional efficiency, i.e., gains
in robust learning per instructional time. Optimization is achieved mathematically by deriving
when a student should repeat practice of a KC. The time interval between practice opportunities
of a KC is optimal (neither too short or too long) when it best balances the benefit of enhanced
memory strength, a benefit higher at a long interval (spaced practice), with the cost of time to
retrain due to retrieval failure, a cost higher at a long interval. Mathematical models may be used
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 26

to produce optimized schedules by computing the KC that will be most efficiently learned if
practiced next.
5.2 Induction and Refinement Enhancing Instruction
Feature Focusing. This principle asserts the value of attending to cues or features that
are valid for the targeted KCs. Focus on key features may help students to learn more quickly
those KCs most important for the goals of learning. More generally, focusing may also result in
students spending more time during a Learning Event on a particular KC and thus increase its
strength.
An example of feature focusing comes from learning to read Chinese, whose characters
often are compounds, consisting of two components. Often these components (radicals) provide
cues to pronunciation and meaning. For example, consider the compound character 晴, which is
translated as fair weather. On the left is a semantic radical 日 that means “sun” and on the right
is a phonetic radical 青 that is pronounced “qing”. Knowing that 日 means ”sun” is useful in
learning the meaning of this compound and others that contain it. Feature focus directs attention
to the form for “sun” in association with is meaning. Standard Chinese reading instruction tends
not to do this, emphasizing instead the meaning of the character as a whole. However, the
research indicates that focusing on the feature of component form-meaning association supports
learning of characters (Taft & Chung, 1999) and that a short instruction to focus on the semantic
radical brings improvement that is dramatic and immediate (Wang, Liu, & Perfetti, C. A., 2004).
In one implementation of the feature focus principle, Dunlap et al. (2011) found that highlighting
the semantic component as a student moves the computer mouse over it improves learning the
character.
A second example comes from science education. Chen and Klahr (1999) found that
when elementary school students were provided with instruction that drew their attention to the
specific features that distinguish confounded and unconfounded experiments, there were
significantly greater gains in children's ability to design good experiments when compared to a
condition in which children were only asked questions, but not instructed about such specific
features.
Worked Examples. In a worked example, students are given a problem description
along with a step-by-step solution to the problem and are asked to study or self-explain the
solution. Sweller and Cooper (1985) demonstrated that alternating worked examples with
standard problems leads to more efficient and more effective learning than having students to
solve all the problems in the set: Students work through the interleaved worked examples and
problems more quickly and perform better on corresponding problems in a posttest. Subsequent
studies have refined the worked example technique. Renkl, Atkinson and Maier (2000)
introduced a “fading” method that yields even better learning outcomes. In this fading technique,
a succession of problems is presented. The first is completely solved and the rest incrementally
replace a solved step with a request for a student solution until ultimately the student is providing
the solution for all steps in a problem. Students are also encouraged to self-explain the solved
solution steps in this fading method and it yields consistent evidence of more robust learning
than problem solving alone. Section 6 provides an expanded analysis of this principle.

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 27

5.3 Understanding and Sense-Making Enhancing Instruction
Prompted Self-Explanation Principle. When students are given a worked example or
text to study, prompting them to self-explain each step of the worked example or each line of the
text usually causes higher learning gains than having them study the material without such
prompting (e.g., Aleven & Koedinger, 2002; Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994; Renkl,
Stark, Gruber, & Mandl, 1998), but exceptions are discussed below. Hausmann and VanLehn
(2007) found that prompting students to self-explain while solving a physics problem produced
more learning than providing them with high quality explanations to study. When it comes to
explaining physics examples, it appears it is better to do it yourself, even if you get it wrong,
than to study someone else’s explanations.
This principle provides a good example of how the effectiveness of a principle may be
dependent on the nature of the target KCs. When both non-verbal and verbal versions of
knowledge are objectives of instruction (i.e., we want both fluent doing and deliberate
explaining), prompting self-explanation can pay off doubly by both 1) strengthening verbal
forms of knowledge and 2) providing redundant support (co-training) for acquiring non-verbal
forms of knowledge. The redundant support idea relies on the assumption that self-explanation is
a verbal explication process that functions in addition to non-verbal learning processes. Verbal
knowledge is an instructional objective for much of math and science where students are
expected to able to state principles (e.g., Newton’s laws) and provide explanations of solutions.
In contrast, in language, a fluent speaker is not expected to explain principles that might underlie
grammatical choices, such as English article selection.
Prompting students to self-explain may not aid learning for some kinds of KCs. One such
KC type is grounded in perceptual learning, for which learner verbalization can serve as an
inhibitor (Schooler et al., 1997). Something similar may occur when a to-be-learned KC is
relatively simple, i.e. non-verbal, lacking a deep rationale, probabilistic, and/or dependent
primarily on perceptual information. Hints in that direction come from a study of learning the
English double dative construction (Frishkoff, Levin, Pavlik, & de Jong, 2008). English allows
speakers to say either “John gave the book to Mary” or “John gave Mary the book”. However,
rather than a set of rules, native speakers’ choices about which noun to put first are subject to a
web of factors that are implicitly weighted (Bresnan et al., 1997). These factors can be translated
into instructional heuristics. When Frishkoff et al. (2008) implemented these heuristics into
problem examples, they found that English second language learners subsequently made choices
more in line with those of native speakers. However, when they provided these heuristics as
feedback following some degree of implicit example-only learning (with correctness-only
feedback), they found it was not helpful. This might imply that verbalization—in this case not by
the learner—can be helpful or harmful as a function of specifically how it connects to learning
that is proceeding implicitly. Self-explanation also might function within a similar space,
supportive of learning in general but sometimes interfering with learning processes that are
essentially nonverbal (e.g., Schooler et al., 1997).
Finally, a more general qualification on the principle of Self-Explanation is that its
successful application, as is the case with sense-making activities generally, depends on having
access to relevant knowledge or to learning strategies that can support the explanation process.
McNamara (2004) found that low knowledge learners reading a science text were unable to
benefit from prompted-self explanation without training. However, with training in strategies to
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 28

support comprehension, including self-explanation strategies, low knowledge learners were able
to show gains in comprehension of the science text.
5.4 Linking knowledge analysis and instructional principles
Our examples so far have illustrated how instructional methods may align with the
learning processes. The existence of these alignments suggests that instructional principles will
not apply universally but will be dependent on the kind of KCs that are the targets of instruction.
Across a wide variety of instructional experiments, simpler Instructional Event types (involving
less time, less feedback, less verbalization and reasoning) tend to be associated with simpler KCs
(involving less time, less complex conditions and responses, less integration with related KCs).
Table 6 illustrates this relationship.

Facts

Rules

Pressure concept

Chem models

Help seeking skls
Physics prinpls

Geometry rules
Chemistry rules

French articles
English articles
Algebra eq

Chinese vocab

Table 6. A possible correlation between the complexity of Knowledge Components and the
complexity of the instruction that best produces such knowledge.
Instructional Principles
(simpler on bottom)
+
Understanding and
Accountable Talk
Sense Making
0
+
Collaboration
0 + +
+
Self-explanation
+ + +
Worked examples
Induction and Diagram coordination
+
+
Refinement
Feature Focusing + +
+
+
+
Feedback
+
Mem & Fluency Optimal Scheduling +

Principles

Knowledge Components
(simpler on left)
“+” indicates the corresponding instructional principle has been experimentally demonstrated to enhance robust learning
efficiency for the corresponding kind of Knowledge Components. “0” indicates an experiment found no difference. An
empty cell indicates absence of relevant experiments.

The apparent association in Table 6 suggests that the complexity of instruction should be
aligned with the complexity of the knowledge goals (the alignment hypothesis). Thus, 1) for
simple kinds of knowledge, complex forms of instruction are not needed and 2) for complex
kinds of knowledge, simple forms of instruction are not needed. However, our analysis of which
learning processes are relevant to which kinds of knowledge (shown in Table 4) suggests an
alternative in which simple kinds of knowledge become embedded in more complex kinds,
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 29

leading to an asymmetry. Instruction for complex KCs (columns to the right of both Tables 4 and
6) may include simpler Instructional Events, whereas instruction for simpler KCs (columns to the
left in both tables) would not benefit from more complex Instructional Events (the asymmetry
hypothesis). For simple KCs, as in our vocabulary examples, memory processes may be
sufficient. Somewhat more complex KCs, such as learning English articles, require induction of
a category structure as well as memory. Learning articles involves forming generalizations, for
instance, that “the” is used across the variable set of situations in which the referent of the target
noun was previously mentioned. But, because the acquired category structure must also be
remembered, instructional methods that effectively engage memory processes are also important
(cf. Frank & Gibson, 2011). This line of reasoning argues against the alignment hypothesis. It
implies that simpler memory enhancing instructional methods, such as spacing, testing, or
optimized scheduling, are also effective for more complex KCs.
What about more complex instructional methods for simpler KCs? To learn an arbitrary
constant-constant association (a fact), a generalization process like that implemented by category
induction is unneeded. Further, for an arbitrary association (e.g., that a Chinese character that
does not contain the “ching” phonetic radical is nonetheless pronounced “ching”), an explanation
structure cannot be used to generate or re-derive a KC. Re-derivation is functional only for
knowledge that has an underlying rationalization (complex knowledge). These observations
suggest the asymmetry hypothesis is more nearly correct.
One counter argument to the asymmetry hypothesis is that more complex instructional
methods, such as accountable talk or even self-explanation prompting, can indirectly achieve the
same robust learning efficiency outcomes (e.g., memory enhancement) that simpler methods
(e.g., optimized scheduling) achieve. Engaging basic memory processes may not be necessary to
the extent that complex forms of instruction help students form an integrated network of
knowledge (e.g., combinations of principles and reasoning strategies) that can be used to
regenerate or re-derive forgotten knowledge. Supporters of mnemonic or memory elaboration
strategies might take this argument further to suggest that robust learning of simple paired
associates can be enhanced by engaging learners in an explanation process in that the mnemonic
is essentially an explanation.
To the extent the instructional goal is robust learning efficiency, outcomes must not only
last and transfer, but also be achieved with less time or, at least, without extra time. Too many
theoretical analyses and experimental studies do not address the time costs of instructional
methods. Practically, use of more complex instructional strategies may not always be worth the
extra time they tend to require.
Others have suggested that the generality of instructional principles may be bounded by
the complexity of targeted knowledge (e.g., Rea & Modigliani, 1985; Sweller & Chandler, 1994;
Wulf & Shea, 2002), but more research is needed to clarify boundaries. The KLI taxonomies
provide a conceptual space to guide alternative hypothesis formation, associated experimentation
and theoretical interpretation.
6. Using the KLI Framework to Illuminate and Compare Instructional Principles
We provide an example of how the KLI Framework can be used to analyze instructional
principles, showing how they operate in Learning Events at the KC level. We focus on the
worked example principle and make connections to the testing and self-explanation principles.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 30

As described in section 5.2, integrating worked examples with problem solving is more efficient
and effective learning for novices than conventional problem solving alone. Our analysis sheds
light on alternative theoretical accounts and demonstrates how the application of the KLI
framework helps specify boundary conditions on the kinds of knowledge and the types of
students for which worked examples are effective.
6.1 Theoretical Interpretations.
The theoretical framework that drives much of the worked example research is Cognitive
Load Theory (van Merriënboer & Sweller, 2005). Human processing capacity is limited, and
this theory argues that much of the cognitive load in novice problem solving practice is
extraneous to robust learning. In problem solving, novices rely heavily on means-ends analysis
and trial-and-error strategies. While these processes are useful for solving novel problems, they
require cognitive resources that cannot then be used (or be used as much) to engage in induction
or sense making (e.g., in reflecting upon or self-explaining generated solution steps). Thus,
novices are less likely to develop a deep understanding of the domain while engaged in pure
problem-solving practice.
An alternative, but possibly complementary, theory proposes that problem solving yields
poorer learning outcomes not because students’ cognitive resources are depleted, but because
there is less environmental information to support students in filling KC gaps (cf., McNamara,
Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch 1996 ; VanLehn, 1999). Since a complete and correct solution is not
available in problem solving, students can apply incorrect knowledge without realizing it,
resulting in the refinement and strengthening of incorrect KCs. In addition, when students do
recognize knowledge gaps, they are more likely to induce appropriate KCs with worked
examples, because a worked example provides more input (KC conditions and responses) than a
problem statement that has only the initial problem (KC conditions only). This additional input
allows induction processes to build better solution knowledge.
6.2 Knowledge Component Level Analysis
In the earliest worked example research, the basic unit of analysis was the complete
solution: Students were asked to study full worked examples and in problem solving were given
feedback and answers based on full solutions. The KLI framework suggests that examining
instruction at the level of KCs, rather than whole problems, can illuminate a deeper theoretical
analysis that provides more precision in defining the critical novice state. Subsequent
computational modeling and empirical research that analyzes the worked example principle at
the level of KCs is beginning to tease apart the competing explanations.
On the empirical front, Renkl and colleagues shifted the analytic focus for worked
examples to the grain-size of KCs when they compared interleaved worked examples and
problem solving to an example “fading” condition (Renkl et al. 2000; Renkl, Atkinson, Maier &
Staley, 2002; Atkinson, Renkl & Merrill, 2003). (See section 5.2) They found that fading was
more effective, yielding better learning outcomes with the same learning time.
Jones and Fleishman (2001) subsequently examined a formal KC-level explanation of
worked examples by applying a computational model of learning called Cascade (VanLehn,
1999) to a set of Newtonian physics problems, asking it both to explain worked examples and
solve problems. These simulations, which model information available in the environment but
not cognitive load nor motivation, replicated the benefits of faded examples over complete
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 31

worked examples on subsequent problem solving. They provide a theoretical argument that the
Knowledge Gap theory is sufficient (though it may not be necessary) to produce the worked
example effect and Cognitive Load Theory is not necessary (though it may be sufficient). In
addition, the authors found that Cascade learns more effectively when the specific problemsolving steps that are faded are ones that introduce new KCs.
Finally, Renkl et al. (2002) began to examine the ordering of faded steps to compare the
predictions of the Cognitive Load and KC gap-filling theories. They found that backward fading
(fading the last step, then the last two steps, etc.) is more efficient and effective than forward
fading (fading the first step, then fading the first two, etc). This result appears to support
Cognitive Load Theory under the assumption that a student’s cognitive load is lower at the end
of a problem, so the student is better able to learn from faded steps at the end of a problem.
However, Renkl, Atkinson and Große (2004) note that this result is ambiguous because the KC
content of faded steps is typically confounded with the position of faded steps. In two studies,
they varied the position of a faded step independently of the specific KC required for the faded
step. The results were consistent with the KC gap-filling theory rather than the Cognitive Load
theory. Students’ test performance was reliably predicted by the specific KC that governs a faded
step, but not by the position of the faded step.
6.3 Defining Novices: A Knowledge Component Analysis.
In contrast to the positive results of worked examples for novice students, a number of studies
(e.g., Kalyuga et al., 2003, 2005) have demonstrated that for more experienced students, straight
problem solving yielded better learning than interleaved worked examples and problem solving.
This result has been dubbed the “expertise reversal effect”.
Expertise reversal raises the question of defining the novice-expert boundary. In most
worked-example research, novices are students who have just received instruction and are just
beginning to apply it; the distinction between novices and advanced students is defined at the
grain size of broad topics within the domain. However, beginning students can vary greatly in
their prior knowledge. Kalyuga and Sweller (2005) addressed this variability by developing
pretests that categorize students as novices or advanced students and showed that channeling the
novices into worked examples and the advanced students directly into problem solving yielded
more efficient learning outcomes.
In the KLI framework the novice/advanced student distinction is that novices are
primarily engaged in KC induction and sense making, while advanced students are primarily
engaged in refinement and fluency building. Novices may benefit from seeing examples of
solution steps to induce variable-variable KCs and from seeing the entire solution structure to
make sense of the role of each step so as to construct integrated KCs for generating plans and
subgoals (cf. Catrambone, 1996). Problem solving, in contrast, offers advanced students the
opportunity to build memory and fluency through active retrieval opportunities (as in the testing
effect) and to refine the conditions of application through feedback on incorrect solution attempts
(Matsuda et al., 2008). A similar case, in which knowledgeable students benefit from active
retrieval, may arise in the reverse cohesion effect in learning from text (McNamara et al, 1996;
McNamara, 2001). In this reversal effect, readers with high knowledge in a domain do better in
learning from a text when the text has cohesion gaps, which presumably stimulate more active
knowledge retrieval and inference making.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 32

Within the KLI framework the expertise reversal effect marks a boundary between two
seemingly contradictory principles, the worked example principle (being shown answers is more
effective than retrieving answers) and the testing effect (retrieving answers is more effective than
being shown answers). In addition to the KC-based boundary suggested above (i.e., worked
examples are better for variable condition KCs, testing for constant-constant KCs), a Learning
Event boundary is that worked examples are better early to support induction and testing is better
later to support memory and fluency.
The optimal grain size for these boundaries is at the level of individual KCs, rather than
the broad topics within a domain, and the ideal goal is to monitor each student’s progression
from sense making and induction to refinement and fluency building for each KC. A recent study
by Salden, Aleven, Renkl & Schwonke (2010) pursued this KC-based approach and
demonstrated that adaptive fading of examples led to greater robust learning than fixed-fading
and no fading conditions (see the description of example fading in section 5). In the adaptive
fading condition, the Cognitive Tutor’s built-in student modeling algorithm was used to monitor
each student’s accuracy in generating explanations for each of the KCs in the cognitive model.
When the student-modeling algorithm estimated a student could correctly generate explanations
for the application of a KC, the student was judged to be transitioning from induction/sense
making to refinement/fluency building and in subsequent problems, solution steps employing
that KC were faded (i.e., presented as problem steps rather than example steps).
6.4 Summary
We illustrated the use of the KLI framework to analyze an instructional principle, the worked
example effect. This analysis 1) finds support for the KC Gap theory as a viable alternative to
Cognitive Load Theory, 2) suggests that “novice” is not a relation between a student and a
domain, but between a student and a KC, 3) proposes boundary conditions between this principle
and a related one, the testing effect, and 4) illustrates how knowledge-level analysis can be
combined with a general instructional principle (faded worked examples) to produce a studentadaptive version of that principle that enhances robust learning.
7. Conclusion
Our goal has been to put forward a theoretical framework (KLI) that links knowledge, learning,
and instruction to organize the development of instructional theory at a grain size appropriate for
guiding the design, development, and continual improvement of effective and efficient academic
course materials, technologies, and instructor practices. This goal reflects the purpose of our
Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center, “to leverage cognitive theory and computational
modeling to identify the conditions that cause robust student learning.” It is also consistent with
broader calls for cumulative theory development in education that is supported by “rigorous,
sustained scientific research” (e.g., Shavelson & Towne, 2002). The need for cumulative theory
is illustrated both by the general lack of consensus around educational practices that work and by
the limitations of large-scale randomized control trials, which are great tests of instructional
practices, but do not generate new theory or practices.
In elaborating the KLI framework, we proposed three fundamental taxonomies of kinds
of knowledge, learning processes, and instructional principles. We outlined potential
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 33

interdependencies between categories in these taxonomies, and illustrated how the framework
can be used to generate new research questions and frame alternative hypotheses.
In developing the KLI framework, we emphasized the importance of KCs, as opposed to
domains (Geometry; English). In contrast to Bloom’s well-known taxonomy (Bloom, 1956),
which is expressed in terms of instructional objectives, our taxonomy focuses on the knowledge
needed to achieve those objectives and is expressed in cognitive process terms. It is at a more
abstract and coarse-grain level than the representations used in computational models of
cognition (e.g., Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; McClelland & Cleeremans, 2009; Newell, 1990;
Sun, 1994). Knowledge, in our account, is decomposable into units that relate some input
characteristics or features of the student’s perceived world or mental state (the conditions) to
some output in the students’ changeable world or mental state (the response). Unlike production
rules in theories of cognitive architecture (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; Newell, 1990), which are
implicit components outside a students’ awareness, the KCs in KLI include explicit, verbalizable
knowledge. Given the prominence of comprehension, reasoning, dialogue, and argumentation in
more complex forms of instruction (e.g., prompted self-explanation, accountable talk), the KLI
knowledge taxonomy distinguishes between kinds of KCs that have accessible rationales, such
that students can effectively reason and argue about them, and some that do not, such that
explicit reasoning and argumentation may be of little value for learning.
Learning occurs as unobservable events that can be inferred from performance and can be
appropriately attributed to instruction events under circumstances of experimental control. The
processes of learning include both simple associations and more complex, reflective processes
that result in KC changes of three broad types: 1) memory and fluency building, 2) induction and
refinement, and 3) understanding and sense making. These learning processes can proceed moreor-less independently or in some synchrony.
Instructional principles emerge from research that is sufficiently convergent to support
generalization. Instructional principles are intended to be widely applicable across domains and
situations, but in fact are likely constrained in their applicability by the kinds of KCs to be
learned and students’ stage of learning. Table 5 summarizes seven such principles, which have
broad experimental support. We noted a general trend for a correspondence between the
complexity of the principle and complexity of the KCs being targeted in those studies. But, our
learning process analysis suggests an asymmetric relationship could turn out to be more nearly
correct: Simple instructional principles are generally relevant, but more complex principles are
only relevant for the most complex kinds of knowledge.
We developed the case of worked examples in enough detail to illustrate the richness of
applying the KLI framework to a single question that has been the focus of much research. Using
the KLI framework and specifically the analysis of KCs led to experiments that found that
instruction that was individualized to specific KCs led to more robust learning than instruction
that was not (Salden et al., 2008). Such studies not only validate the basic assumption that KCs
are the functional unit of analysis for learning, they suggest instructional procedures that can be
the object of further research, leading at some point to a broad instructional principle.
The strategy of creating a student-adaptive version of a principle by applying a
knowledge analysis could be applied not only to adaptive fading of worked examples as
described above, but also to other principles as Pavlik (2007) has demonstrated for the spacing
effect. For example, it may be productive to employ student-adaptive fading from blocked
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 34

practice to random practice (cf. Wulf & Shea, 2002), from comparison (Gentner et al., 2009) to
sequential spaced presentation (Rohrer & Taylor, 2006), from low content variability to high
variability (cf. Paas & Van Merrienboer, 1994). Regarding the testing effect, the Salden et al.
(2008) study indicates that adaptive fading from study trials (“examples” in this context) to test
trials (“problems”) is sometimes more effective. The knowledge taxonomy provides a guide for
hypothesizing how far the results may generalize outside the Geometry content that was
investigated. Instead of making a domain-general claim about applicability, we suggest that
fading of example study to problem/test should work for content with variable-variable KCs with
rationales. For constant-constant KCs, adaptive fading may be wasted effort and simply
providing study trials (examples) only after failures on test/problem attempts may be optimal, as
is done in the most effective conditions in the testing effect experiments.
Other researchers have recognized the importance for effective instructional design of a
detailed analysis of domain content into the components of knowledge that students bring to a
course and those we would like them to take away. Nevertheless, Anderson and Schunn (2000)
expressed concern that “detailed cognitive analyses of various critical educational domains are
largely ignored by psychologists, domain experts and educators”. They noted the tendency for
psychologists to value domain-general results, domain experts (e.g., mathematicians and
linguists) to value new results in their domain, and educational researchers to value more holistic
explanations. Some progress has been made (e.g., Clark, Feldon, van Merriënboer, Yates, &
Early, 2007; Lee, 2003), but careful cognitive task analysis of domain knowledge is not a
standard research practice in any discipline. Such analysis needs to become a more routine part
of instructional design for new instructional domains as well as for existing ones.
Finally we emphasize that the KLI framework implies a broad range of empirical studies
that can disconfirm as well as strengthen some of its propositions. The framework is not a set of
frozen taxonomies but an interconnected set of theoretical and empirical propositions that imply
hypothesis-testing experiments. As with any theoretical framework, its utility is tested by
whether it stimulates sufficient work to lead to its revision, abandonment, or enrichment through
an increasingly well targeted set of research results from the learning and educational sciences.

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 35

References
Ainsworth, S., & Loizou, A.Th. (2003). The effects of self-explaining when learning with text or diagrams.
Cognitive Science, 27, 669-681.
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K.R. (2002). An effective metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing and explaining with
a computer-based Cognitive Tutor. Cognitive Science, 26(2).
Aleven, V., Roll, I., McLaren, B.M., & Koedinger, K.R. (2010). Automated, unobtrusive, action-by- action
assessment of self-regulation during learning with an intelligent tutoring system. Educational Psychologist,
45(4), 224-233.
Alibali, M.W. & Koedinger, K.R. (1999). The developmental progression from implicit to explicit knowledge: A
computational approach. (Commentary on Z. Dienes & J. Perner, A theory of implicit and explicit knowledge.)
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10, 755-756.
Anderson, J.R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Anderson, J.R. (2002). Spanning seven orders of magnitude: A challenge for cognitive modeling. Cognitive Science,
26(1), 85-112
Anderson, J.R., & Schunn, C.D. (2000). Implications of the ACT-R learning theory: No magic bullets. In R.
Glaser (Ed), Advances in instructional psychology: 5. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. (1-34).
Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S., Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review 111, (4). 1036-1060.
Anderson, J.R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Asterhan, C.S.C. & Schwarz, B.B. (2009). The role of argumentation and explanation in conceptual change:
Indications from protocol analyses of peer-to-peer dialogue. Cognitive Science, 33, 373-399.
Atkinson, R.K., Renkl, A. & Merrill, M.M. (2003). Transitioning from studying examples to solving problems:
Effects of self-explanation prompts and fading worked-out steps. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 774783
Barnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we apply what we learn? A taxonomy for far transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 128, 612–637.
Bloom, B.S. (Ed.). (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives. Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. New York:
McKay.
Blum, A., & Mitchell, T. (1998). Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Proceedings of Eleventh
Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), (pp. 92–100). New York: ACM Press.
Booth, J.L., & Koedinger, K.R. (2008). Key misconceptions in algebraic problem solving. In B.C. Love, K. McRae,
& V.M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. (pp. 571576).
Bransford, J.D., & Schwartz, D. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications. In A.
Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of Research in Education (Vol. 24). Washington, DC: American
Educational Research Association.
Bransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T., & Baayen, R.H. (2005). Predicting the dative alternation. Paper presented at the
KNAW Academy Colloquium: Cognitive Foundations of Interpretation, Amsterdam.
Bruner, J. S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Case, R., & Okamoto, Y. (1996). The role of central conceptual structures in the development of children's thought.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 61 (1-2, Serial No. 246).
Catrambone, R. (1996). Generalizing solution procedures learned from examples. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1020-1031.
Cen, H., Koedinger, K.R., & Junker, B. (2007). Is over practice necessary? – improving learning efficiency with the
Cognitive Tutor through educational data mining. In Luckin, R., Koedinger, K. R. & Greer, J. (Eds.).
Proceedings of 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED2007), 511-518.
Amsterdam, IOS Press.
Cepeda, N.J., Pashler, H., Vul, E., Wixted, J.T., & Rohrer, D. (2006). Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A
review and quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 354-380.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 36

Chang, N.M. (2006). Learning to Discriminate and Generalize through Problem Comparisons. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA.
Chen, Z. & Klahr, D., (1999). All other things being equal: children's acquisition of the control of variables
strategy, Child Development , 70 (5), 1098 - 1120.
Chen, Z. & Klahr, D., (2008). Remote transfer of scientific reasoning and problem-solving strategies in children. In
R. V. Kail (Ed.) Advances in Child Development and Behavior, Vol. 36. (pp. 419 – 470) Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477.
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts
and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121–152.
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study and
use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Clark, R.E., Feldon, D., van Merriënboer, J., Yates, K., & Early, S. (2007). Cognitive task analysis. In J.M. Spector,
M.D. Merrill, J.J.G. van Merriënboer, & M.P. Driscoll (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational
communications and technology (3rd ed., pp. 577–593). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clark, R.C. & Meyer, R.E. (2003). e-Learning and the science of instruction. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer.
Clement, J. (1987). Overcoming students’ misconceptions in physics: fundamental change in children’s physics
knowledge. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 785-797.
Corbett, A.T. & Anderson, J.R. (2001). Locus of feedback control in computer-based tutoring: Impact on learning
rate, achievement and attitudes. Proceedings of ACM CHI’2001 Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 245-252.
De Jong, N. & Perfetti, C.A. (2011). Fluency training in the ESL classroom: An experimental study of fluency
development and proceduralization.. Language Learning 61(2), 533-568.
Dienes, Z. & Perner, J. (1999). A theory of implicit and explicit knowledge. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, (5),
735-808.
diSessa, A.A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10(2 & 3), 105-225.
Donovan, J. J., & Radosevich, D. J. (1999). A meta-analytic review of the distribution of practise effect: Now you
see it, now you don’t. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 795–805.
Dunlap, S., Perfetti, C.A., Liu, Y., & Wu, S.M. (2011) Learning vocabulary in Chinese as a foreign language:
Effects of explicit instruction and semantic cue reliability. http://www.pitt.edu/~perfetti/PDF/Dunlap Learning
vocabulary.pdf
Elliot, A.J. (2005). A conceptual history of the achievement goal construct. In A. Elliot & C. Dweck (Eds.),
Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 52-72). New York: Guilford Press.
Engelmann, S. & Carnine, D. (1991). Theory of instruction: Principles and applications. Eugene, OR: ADI Press.
Feng, M., Heffernan, N.T., & Koedinger, K.R. (2009). Addressing the assessment challenge in an online system that
tutors as it assesses. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction: The Journal of Personalization Research
(UMUAI). 19(3), pp. 243-266.
Frank, M. C. & Gibson, E. (2011). Overcoming memory limitations in rule learning. Language, Learning, &
Development, 7, 130-148.
Frishkoff, G.A., Pavlik P., Levin, L., & de Jong, C. (2008). Providing optimal support for robust learning of
syntactic constructions in ESL. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(CogSci08). Washington, D.C.
Fox, M.C. & Charness, N. (2009). How to gain eleven IQ points in ten minutes: Thinking aloud improves Raven’s
Matrices performance in older adults. Aging, Neuropsychology, and cognition. 17(2), 191-204.
Gagne, R.M. (1985). The Conditions of Learning and Theory of Instruction (fourth edition). New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K. D. (2009). Reviving inert knowledge: Analogical
abstraction supports relational retrieval of past events. Cognitive Science, 33, 1343-1382.
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Gobet, F. (2005). Chunking models of expertise: Implications for education. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19,
183–204.
Goldstone, R.L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of scientific principles using concrete and idealized simulations.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1), 69–110.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 37

Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., & VanLehn, K. (2005). Scaffolding deep comprehension strategies through
Point&Query, AutoTutor, and iSTART. Educational Psychologist, 40, 225-234.
Hausmann, R.G.M., Nokes, T.J., VanLehn, K., & Gershman, S. (2009). The design of self-explanation prompts: The
fit hypothesis. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Hausmann, R. G. M., & VanLehn, K. (2007). Explaining self-explaining: A contrast between content and
generation. In R. Luckin, K. R. Koedinger & J. Greer (Eds.), Proceedings of AI in Education, pp. 417-424.
Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Hebb D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior. New York: Wiley
Heffernan, N. & Koedinger, K. R. (1997). The composition effect in symbolizing: The role of symbol production
vs. text comprehension. In Shafto, M. G. & Langley, P. (Eds.) Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 307-312). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolic-connectionist theory of relational inference and generalization.
Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Jones, R.M. & Fleischman, E.S. (2001) CASCADE explains and informs the utility of fading examples to problems,
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 459–464. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kalyuga, S. & Sweller, J. (2005). Rapid dynamic assessment of expertise to improve the efficiency of adaptive elearning. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53, 83-93.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist,
38, 23-32.
Kaminski, J.A., Sloutsky, V.M., & Heckler, A.F. (2008). The advantage of learning abstract examples in learning
math. Science, 320, 454-455.
Katz, S., Lesgold, A., Eggan, G. & Greenberg, L. (1996). Towards the design of more effective advisors for
learning-by-doing systems. In C. Frasson, G. Gauthier, & A. Lesgold, (Eds.) Intelligent tutoring systems: Third
international conference , ITS ’96, 641-649. New York: Springer.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Koedinger, K.R. & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the assistance dilemma in experiments with Cognitive Tutors.
Educational Psychology Review, 19 (3): 239-264.
Koedinger, K.R., Aleven, V., Roll, I. & Baker, R. (2009). In vivo experiments on whether supporting metacognition
in intelligent tutoring systems yields robust learning. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, A. C. Graesser (Eds.)
Handbook of Metacognition in Education. New York: Routledge.
Koedinger, K.R. & McLaughlin, E.A. (2010). Seeing language learning inside the math: Cognitive analysis yields
transfer. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Koedinger, K.R. & Nathan, M.J. (2004). The real story behind story problems: Effects of representations on
quantitative reasoning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13 (2), 129-164.
Koedinger, K. R. & Terao, A. (2002). A cognitive task analysis of using pictures to support pre-algebraic reasoning.
In C. D. Schunn & W. Gray (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 542-547. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:Cambridge
University Press.
Lee, R.L. (2003). Cognitive task analysis: A meta-analysis of comparative studies. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
Levine, M. (1966). Hypothesis behavior by humans during discrimination learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 71, 331–338.
Lewis, C.H. (1988). Why and how to learn why: Analysis-based generalization of procedures. Cognitive Science,
12, pp. 211-256.
Logan, G. D. (1988) Toward an instance theory of automatization. Psychological Review, 95(4), 492-527.
MacLaren, B. & Koedinger, K.R. (2002). When and why does mastery learning work: Instructional experiments
with ACT-R “SimStudents”. In S.A. Cerri, G. Gouarderes, & F. Paraguacu (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 355-366. Berlin: Springer-Verlag
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 38

Matsuda, N., Cohen, W., Sewall, J., Lacerda, G., & Koedinger, K.R. (2008). Why tutored problem solving may be
better than example study: Theoretical implications from a simulated-student study. In B. Woolf et al. (Eds.):
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of Intelligent Tutoring Systems, pp. 111-121. Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg.
McClelland, J. L., & Cleeremans, A. (2009). Connectionist models. In T. Byrne, A. Cleeremans, & P. Wilken
(Eds.), Oxford Companion to Consciousness. New York: Oxford University Press.
McClelland, J.L., Fiez, J.A., & McCandliss, B.D. (2002). Teaching the /r/-/l/ discrimination to Japanese adults:
behavioral and neural aspects. Physiology & Behavior, 77, 657–62.
McLaren, B. M., Lim, S., & Koedinger, K.R. (2008). When and how often should worked examples be given to
students? New results and a summary of the current state of research. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M.
Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2176-2181).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high and low coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 51–62.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading training. Discourse Processes, 38(1), 1-30.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of text
coherence, background knowledge, and levels of understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14(1), 1-43.
Medin, D., & Schaffer, M. (1978). Context theory of classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207–238.
Michaels, S., O’Connor, C., & Resnick, L.B. (2008). Deliberative discourse idealized and realized: Accountable talk
in the classroom and in civic life. Studies in the Philosophy of Education, 27(4), 283-297.
Minstrell, J. (2001). Facets of students' thinking: Designing to cross the gap from research to standards-based
practice. In K. Crowley, C. D. Schunn and T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for Science: Implications for
Professional, Instructional, and Everyday Science. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mitchell, T.M., Keller, R.M., & Kedar-Cabelli, S.T. (1986). Explanation-based generalization: A unifying view.
Machine Learning, 1, 47-80.
National Reading Panel (2000). Report of the National Reading Panel. Teaching children to read: An evidencebased assessment of the scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction
(00-4769). Washington, DC: National Institute of Child Health & Human Development.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Ogan, A., Aleven, V., & Jones, C. (2009). Advancing development of intercultural competence through supporting
predictions in narrative video. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 19(3), 267-288.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning from performance errors. Psychological Review, 103(2), 241-262.
O'Reilly, R.C. & Munakata, Y. (2000). Computational Explorations in Cognitive Neuroscience: Understanding the
Mind by Simulating the Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Paas, F.G.W.C, & Van Merrienboer, J.J.G. (1994). Variability of worked examples and transfer of geometrical
problem-solving skills: A cognitive-load approach. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 122-133.
Palincsar, A.S., & Brown, A.L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehensionmonitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Pashler, H., Bain, P., Bottge, B., Graesser, A., Koedinger, K., McDaniel, M., & Metcalfe, J. (2007). Organizing
Instruction and Study to Improve Student Learning (NCER 2007-2004). Washington, DC: National Center for
Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Pavlik Jr., P. I. (2007). Understanding and applying the dynamics of test practice and study practice. Instructional
Science, 35, 407-441.
Posner, M.I. (in press). The Expert Brain. Volume of Carnegie Symposium on Cognitive Science.
Quilici, J. H. & Mayer, R. E. (1996). Role of examples in how students learn to categorize statistics word problems.
J. Educ. Psychol. 88:144–61.
Rayner, K., Foorman, B.R., Perfetti, C.A., Pesetsky, D., & Seidenberg, M.S. (2001). How should reading be taught.
Scientific American.
Rea, C.P., & Modigliani, V. (1985). The effect of expanded versus massed practise on the retention of multiplication
facts and spelling lists. Human Learning: Journal of Practical Research & Applications, 4, 11–18.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 1–
29.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 39

Renkl, A., Atkinson, R.K., & Große, C.S. (2004). How fading worked solution steps works—a cognitive load
perspective. Instructional Science, 32, 59–82.
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R.K., & Maier, U.H. (2000). From studying examples to solving problems: Fading worked-out
solution steps helps learning. In L. Gleitman & A.K. Joshi (Eds.), Proceeding of the 22nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 393–398).
Renkl, A., Atkinson, R.K., Maier, U.H., & Staley, R. (2002). From example study to problem solving: Smooth
transitions help learning. Journal of Experimental Education, 70, 293–315.
Renkl, A., Stark, R., Gruber, H., & Mandl, H. (1998). Learning from worked-out examples: The effects of example
variability and elicited self-explanations. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23, 90-108.
Richman, H. B., Staszewski, J. J., & Simon, H. A. (1995). Simulation of expert memory with EPAM IV.
Psychological Review, 102, 305–330.
Rissanen, J. (1978). Modeling by shortest data description. Automatica, 14, pp. 465-471.
Rittle-Johnson, B. & Koedinger, K.R. (2001). Using cognitive models to guide instructional design: The case of
fraction division. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
857-862). Mahwah,NJ: Erlbaum.
Roediger, H.L. & Karpicke, J.D. (2006). The power of testing memory: Basic research and implications for
educational practice. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1, 181-210.
Salden, R.J.C.M., Aleven, V., & Renkl, A., & Schwonke, R. (2008). Worked examples and tutored problem solving:
Redundant or synergistic forms of support? In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 589-594). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Schmidt, R.A., & Bjork, R.A. (1992). New conceptualizations of practice: Common principles in three paradigms
suggest new concepts for training. Psychological Science, 3, 207-217.
Schneider W. & Shiffrin, R.M. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information processing: I. Detection, search
and attention. Psychological Review, 84, 1–66.
Schoenfeld, A. (2004). The math wars. Educational Policy, 18 (1), 253-286.
Schooler, Fiore, & Brandimonte (1997). At a loss From words: Verbal overshadowing of perceptual memories.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory. Academic Press
Schwonke, R., Renkl, A., Krieg, C., Wittwer, J., Aleven, V., & Salden, R. (2009). The worked-example effect: Not
an artifact of lousy control conditions. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 258-266.
Servan-Schreiber, E. & Anderson, J.R. (1990). Learning artificial grammars with competitive chunking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 592-608.
Shavelson, R.J., & Towne, L. (Eds.). (2002). Scientific research in education. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Shepard, R.N. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization of psychological science. Science, 237, 1317-1323.
Slotta, J.D. & Chi, M.T.H. (2006). The impact of ontology training on conceptual change: Helping students
understand the challenging topics in science. Cognition and Instruction, 24, 261-289.
Stamper, J. & Koedinger, K.R. (2011). Human-machine student model discovery and improvement using data. In J.
Kay, S. Bull & G. Biswas (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education, pp. 353-360. Berlin: Springer.
Stylianides, G.J., & Stylianides, A.J. (2009). Facilitating the transition from empirical arguments to proof. Journal
for Research in Mathematics Education, 40(3), 314-352
Sun, R., 1994. Integrating rules and connectionism for robust commonsense reasoning. John Wiley and Sons, New
York.
Sweller, J. & Cooper, G.A. (1985) The use of worked examples as a substitute for problem solving in learning
algebra, Cognition and Instruction 2: 59–89.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 185–233.
Taft, M., & Chung, K. (1999). Using radicals in teaching Chinese characters to second language learners.
Psychologia, 42, 243-251.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Sweller, J. (2005). Cognitive load theory and complex learning: Recent developments
and future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17(1), 147-177.
VanLehn, K. (1999). Rule learning events in the acquisition of a complex skill: An evaluation of Cascade. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 8(1), 71-125.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 40

Wang, M., Liu, Y., & Perfetti, C. A. (2004). The implicit and explicit learning of orthographic structure and function
of a new writing system. Scientific Studies of Reading, 8(4), 357-379.
Wulf, G. & Shea, C.H. (2002). Principles derived from the study of simple skills do not generalize to complex skill
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 185-211.
Wylie, R., Koedinger, K. R., & Mitamura, T. (2009). Is self-explanation always better? The effects of adding selfexplanation prompts to an English grammar tutor. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Zhu X., Lee Y., Simon H.A., & Zhu, D. (1996). Cue recognition and cue elaboration in learning from examples. In
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93, (pp. 1346±1351).

Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) Framework 41

Footnotes
i

The level of KC analysis is a function of the target content and the target student population. It
may not have a tight age correspondence. The relevant level for adults learning to read Chinese
as second language may be lower than second graders learning to read English as a first
language. Reading errors of adults learning Chinese could lead to a focus on KCs at the level of
the stroke patterns that form the graphemes (characters) that make up words whereas reading
errors of second graders learning English may lead to a focus on KC relevant for word
identification that are above the level of recognizing graphemes (letters).
ii
While our notion of KC shares similarity in condition-action structure with production rules in
theories of cognitive architecture (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; Newell, 1990) and with situationaction schemas in theories of analogical transfer (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983), it is a more
general idea that encompasses both and includes explicit, verbalizable knowledge. The inclusion
of a condition component, even for verbal, declarative knowledge, represents a KLI assumption
that learning when to do or think something is a critical part of learning.
iii
In formal computational modeling, paired associates (constant-constant mappings) can be
represented in a schema or production rule without the use of any variables whereas categories
(variable-constant) and general rules or principles (variable-variable) require the use of variables.
Or in structure mapping (Gentner et al., 2009), relations are variables and the primitive objects
(at the leaves of a structure map) are the constants.
iv
The sun radical, one can argue, reflects the evolution of an iconic non-arbitrary representation
of the sun to a more abstract graph that continues to be non-arbitrary; however, from a reader’s
point of view graphs generally have at most an opaque, seemingly arbitrary, connection to
meaning, even in Chinese and certainly in alphabetic writing systems.
v
Vocabulary KCs for words with explicit morphological markers (e.g., past tense of regular
verbs in English, like “jumped”) are not members of this constant-constant fact category, but of
the variable-variable rule category (e.g., To form the past tense of <verb>, produce <verb>
followed by “ed”).
vi
Note that knowledge of recognizing expressions as fractions (e.g., saying that “3/4” is a
fraction but that “3-4” is not) is not the same as being able to state the definition of a fraction,
which is a constant-constant KC (mapping “fraction” to “quotient of two quantities”).
vii
Knowledge of visual images (e.g., someone’s face) is in declarative memory in ACT-R, but
people cannot always verbalize such knowledge so it is non-verbal in KLI.
viii
For example, while the plural of tip is pronounced tip[s], the plural of tub is tub[z]. The
difference between these two pronunciations is handled by a natural phonotactic constraint that
makes it easier to assimilate the voicing feature from the preceding consonant (/p/ and /s/ are
unvoiced, /b/ and /z/ are voiced), thus producing tub[z], than to shift from voiced to unvoiced to
produce tub[s]. This constraint is not arbitrary because its source is the human speech
mechanism.
ix
In a KC analysis for a particular course, a KC should be unpacked into smaller KCs when
incoming student performance on tasks assessing those smaller KCs is sufficiently lower than a
high threshold success rate (e.g., 95%), or in cases emphasizing fluency, than a desired reaction
time.
Authors’ final version of:
Koedinger, K.R., Corbett, A.C., & Perfetti, C. (2012). The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction (KLI) framework:
Bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust student learning. Cognitive Science, 36 (5), 757-798.
ISSN: 0364-0213 print / 1551-6709 online DOI: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2012.01245.x

