Resource Letter RBAI-1: Research-based Assessment Instruments
in Physics and Astronomy
Adrian Madsen, Sam McKagan
American Association of Physics Teachers, College Park, MD
Eleanor C. Sayre
Department of Physics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506

Abstract
This resource letter provides a guide to research-based assessment instruments (RBAIs)
of physics and astronomy content. These are standardized assessments that were
rigorously developed and revised using student ideas and interviews, expert input, and
statistical analyses. RBAIs have had a major impact on physics and astronomy education
reform by providing a universal and convincing measure of student understanding that
instructors can use to assess and improve the effectiveness of their teaching. In this
resource letter, we present an overview of all content RBAIs in physics and astronomy by
topic, research validation, instructional level, format, and themes, to help faculty find the
best assessment for their course.
I. INTRODUCTION
The physics and astronomy education research communities have produced 60+ researchbased assessment instruments (RBAIs) of physics and astronomy content, which evaluate
the effectiveness of different teaching methods. We define a research-based assessment as
an assessment that is developed based on research into student thinking for use by the

1

wider physics and astronomy education community to provide a standardized assessment
of teaching and learning. Conceptual RBAIs have had a major impact on physics
education reform by providing a universal and convincing measure of student
understanding that instructors can use to assess and improve the effectiveness of their
teaching. Studies using these instruments consistently show that research-based teaching
methods lead to dramatic improvements in students’ conceptual understanding of
physics.1,2 These instruments are already being used on a very large scale: The Force
Concept Inventory3 (FCI), a test of basic concepts of forces and acceleration, has been
given to thousands of students throughout the world; the use of similar instruments in
nearly every subject area of physics is becoming increasingly widespread. According to a
recent survey of faculty who are about to participate in the Workshop for New Faculty in
Physics and Astronomy, nearly half have heard of the FCI, and nearly a quarter have used
it in their classrooms.4 The use of these instruments has the potential to transform
teaching practice by informing instructors about their teaching efficacy so that they can
improve it.

Our previous research shows that many physics faculty are aware of the existence of
RBAIs for introductory physics, but want to know more about RBAIs for a wider range
of topics, including upper-division physics, and about which assessments are available
and how to use them.5 This resource letter addresses these needs of physics faculty by
presenting an overview of content RBAIs by topic, research validation, instructional level,
format, and themes, to help faculty find the best assessment for their course. A second
resource letter will discuss the large number of RBAIs that cover non-content topics such

2

as attitudes and beliefs about physics, epistemologies and expectations, the nature of
physics, problem solving, self-efficacy, math skills, reasoning skills and lab skills.

We begin with a general discussion of the process of development and validation of
RBAIs (Section II), and then discuss specific RBAIs in each of the major content areas in
physics and astronomy. These RBAIs cover a diverse set of topics including mechanics
(Section III), electricity and magnetism (Section IV), quantum mechanics and modern
physics (Section V), thermodynamics (Section VI), waves and optics (Section VII), and
astronomy (Section VIII), at a range of levels from high school to graduate school. The
only major physics content area where we are unaware of any RBA is statistical
mechanics.

Most RBAIs are multiple-choice tests based on research into students’ ideas about a
narrow range of introductory-level topics. There are also some assessments of upper-level
topics, which are often free-response format, and are based on experts’ ideas about a
topic, since students’ have fewer ideas about these topics coming into the course.
Researchers are experimenting with new ways to turn these upper-division free-response
RBAIs into multiple-choice assessments. There are also RBAIs which cover a wide range
of topics, with fewer questions about each. These can give instructors a better sense of
what their students learned about many topics, though, since each topic is not probed in
depth, there is more uncertainty in the results.

More details about each of these RBAIs are available at physport.org/assessments, where

3

verified educators can download most RBAIs. Wilcox et al.6 have a more detailed
discussion of upper-division RBAIs.

1.

“Secondary analysis of teaching methods in introductory physics: A 50k - student
study,” J. Von Korff, B. Archibeque, A. Gomez, S. B. McKagan, E. C. Sayre, E. W.
Schenk, C. Shepherd, and L. Sorell, submitted to Am. J. Phys. (2016). (E)

2.

“Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey
of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses,” R.R. Hake, Am. J. Phys. 66
(1), 64–74 (1998). (E)

3.

“Force Concept Inventory,” D. Hestenes, M. M. Wells, and G. Swackhamer, Phys.
Teach. 30 (3), 141–166 (1992). (E)

4.

“Promoting Instructional Change in New Faculty: An Evaluation of the Physics and
Astronomy New Faculty Workshop,” C. Henderson, Am. J. Phys. 76 (2), 179–187
(2008). (E)

5.

“Research-based assessment affordances and constraints: Perceptions of physics
faculty,” A. Madsen, S. B. McKagan, M. S. Martinuk, A. Bell, A. & E. C. Sayre,
Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res 12 (010115), 1–16 (2015). (E)

6. “Development and uses of upper-division conceptual assessments,” B. R. Wilcox, M.
D. Caballero, C. Baily, S. V. Chasteen, Q. X. Ryan, S. J. Pollock, Phys. Rev. Spec.
Top. - Phys. Educ. Res 11 (020115), 1–12 (2014). (E)

II.

DEVELOPMENT

AND

VALIDATION

ASSESSMENTS
4

OF

RESEARCH-BASED

Good research-based assessment instruments are different from typical exams in that
their creation involves extensive research and development by experts in physics
education research (PER) and/or astronomy education research (AER) to ensure that
the questions represent concepts that faculty think are important, that the possible
responses represent real student thinking and make sense to students, and that students’
scores reliably tell us something about their understanding. The typical process of
developing a research-based assessment includes the following steps:7,8
1)

Gathering students’ ideas about a given topic, usually with interviews or openended written questions.

2)

Using students’ ideas to write multiple-choice conceptual questions where the
incorrect responses cover the range of students’ most common incorrect ideas
using the students’ actual wording.

3)

Testing these questions with another group of students. Usually, researchers use
interviews where students talk about their thinking for each question.

4)

Testing these questions with experts in the discipline to ensure that they agree
on the importance of the questions and the correctness of the answers.

5)

Revising questions based on feedback from students and experts.

6)

Administering assessment to large numbers of students. Checking the
reproducibility of results across courses and institutions. Checking the
distributions of answers. Using various statistical methods to ensure the
reliability of the assessment.

7)

Revising again.

5

This rigorous development process produces valid and reliable assessments that can be
used to compare instruction across classes and institutions. Based on the steps to
developing a good research-based assessment, we have created list of seven categories of
research validation (Table II).

We determine the level of research validation for an assessment based on how many of
the research validation categories apply to the RBA (Table II). RBAIs will have a gold
level validation when they have been rigorously developed and recognized by a wider
research community. Silver-level RBAIs are well-validated, but only by the developers
and not the larger community. This could be because these assessments are new. Bronzelevel assessments are those where developers have done some validation but are missing
pieces. Finally, research-based validation means that an assessment is likely still in the
early stages.

6

7.

“Development and validation of instruments to measure learning of expert-like
thinking,” W. K. Adams and C. E. Wieman, Int. Jour. of Sci. Ed. 33 (9), 1289–1312
(2011). (E)

8.

“An introduction to classical test theory as applied to conceptual multiple-choice
tests,” P. V. Engelhardt, Getting Started in PER 2 (1), 1–40 (2009). (E)

III. MECHANICS ASSESSMENTS
The topic of mechanics has the largest number of RBAIs, because so many students
take introductory mechanics courses at the university level and the content is very
standardized. These mechanics RBAIs cover kinematics and forces, energy and
rotation (Table III). Because of the wide variety of topics taught in introductory
mechanics courses, there is no assessment where all course content is covered. Instead
these assessments have a more narrow range of topics, so that you can probe your
students’ understanding of each sub-topic in mechanics more thoroughly. There is
also one mechanics RBA for intermediate and upper-division mechanics courses.

7

A. Kinematics and Forces
1. Overview of Kinematics and Forces Assessments
There are six RBAIs which cover kinematics and forces: The Force Concept
Inventory3 (FCI), Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation9 (FMCE), Test of
Graphical Understanding: Kinematics10 (TUG-K), Mechanics Baseline Test11 (MBT),
Force, Velocity and Acceleration Test12 (FVA) and Inventory of Basic Conceptions in
Mechanics13 (IBCM). Research and development of kinematics and forces RBAIs has
been occurring since the early 1990s, with the FCI3 being one of the earliest
8

developed RBAIs in physics. The kinematics and forces RBAIs are all used in
introductory classes at the university level, and some are also appropriate for high
school students.

The most commonly used test of forces and motion is the Force Concept Inventory3
(FCI), with results published for over 30,000 students.1 This is a multiple-choice
assessment about the most basic concepts of force and motion. The FCI was the first
RBA in physics that presented answer choices consisting of Newtonian concepts and
common-sense alternatives that were based on research into student thinking. Physics
instructors’ first impression of the FCI is often that it is too trivial, but then they are
surprised when their students score poorly. Understanding which common-sense
alternatives students choose is just as important as looking at the number of correct
answers, as this information helps instructors learn how to improve their teaching.
The FCI was also the first RBA to show that traditional instruction does not help
students learn the most basic concepts in Newtonian physics. The original version of
the FCI was a revision of an earlier test called the Mechanics Diagnostic Test14
(MDT).

There are several variations of the FCI: The Gender FCI15,16 (or Everyday FCI) uses
the same questions and answer choices as the original FCI, but changes the contexts
to make them more “everyday” or “feminine.” The Animated FCI17 takes the original
FCI questions and animates the diagrams, so it is given on a computer. The
Representational Variant of the FCI18 (R-FCI) takes nine questions from the original

9

FCI and redesigns them using various representations (such as motion maps, vectorial
and graphical representations). The Familiar Context FCI19 presents the original FCI
questions with everyday contexts, e.g., falling fruit instead of stones or colliding
shopping carts instead of cars. The Simplified FCI19 was adapted from the original
FCI and made simpler for ninth grade physics.

The Force Motion Conceptual Evaluation9 (FMCE) is another multiple-choice
assessment of forces and motion, that has been widely used (published results for over
10,000 students1). The questions on the FMCE are also based on research into student
thinking. The FMCE has been used to show that traditional instruction does little to
change students’ conceptual understanding of forces and motion. Many of the
questions on the FMCE have a more complex question format, which includes a
description of the problem context, a list of answer choices (often more than 5) and
then several questions about that problem situation. In order to give the FMCE in
class, a special Scantron with room for 10 answer choices is needed.

Both the FCI and FMCE cover forces and motion, but they have different emphases.
The FCI covers more topics than the FMCE, but the FMCE has more questions about
each topic to more thoroughly assess students’ understanding of each topic. Both tests
assess one-dimensional kinematics and Newton’s laws. The FCI also includes
questions on two-dimensional motion with constant acceleration (parabolic motion),
impulsive forces, vector sums, cancellation of forces, and identification of forces.20
The FMCE includes questions about graphs of motion, whereas the FCI does not. The

10

questions on the FCI each have five answer choices whereas some questions on the
FMCE have more than 5. FCI questions 15 and 16 present the same situation as
FMCE questions 35-38. FCI question 28 is nearly identical to FMCE question 39.
There is a strong correlation between FCI and FMCE scores.20 Because both of these
tests are so popular, there is a large corpus of comparison data, which can help you
understand how your students’ scores compare to others.

The Mechanics Baseline Test11 (MBT) assesses more formal dimensions of basic
Newtonian physics than the FCI and is meant to be used alongside the FCI to get a
well-rounded picture of students’ understanding. The answer choices include typical
student mistakes but not common-sense alternatives like the FCI. The FCI questions
can be answered with no previous physics training, whereas the MBT uses more
formal language and includes graphical representations of motion and calculational
problems that could not be answered without formal physics training. The MBT
covers kinematics and forces, like the FCI, but also includes questions on energy and
momentum, which are not covered in the FCI. The MBT includes just a few questions
on Newton’s first and third laws, since these are well covered in the FCI.

The multiple-choice questions on the Inventory of Basic Conceptions in Mechanics13
(IBCM) also assesses introductory students’ understanding of Newton’s laws and
forces. The IBCM uses questions from the FCI, MBT, and MDT, but makes slight
changes to the wording and answer choices. Since the IBCM takes questions from the
FCI and MBT, it is very similar to both of these tests. The IBCM concentrates on

11

Newtonian theory with only two basic models: the free particle and uniformly
accelerated motion. It does not include centripetal and centrifugal forces.

The Force, Velocity and Acceleration test12 (FVA) probes students’ understanding of
the relationships between force, velocity, and acceleration. Each question presents a
scenario with information about either the force, velocity, or acceleration vectors and
then asks students about what this means for one of the other vectors. The FVA test
provides a coherent picture of student understanding of the relationships between
these three by probing six possible conditional relations between them. The
relationships between force, velocity, and acceleration on the FVA test are similar to
those relationships probed in several questions on the FCI (questions 4, 7, and 9) and
FMCE (questions 1, 3, and 12).

The multiple-choice questions on the Test of Graphical Understanding: Kinematics10
(TUG-K) focus on students’ understanding of position, velocity, and acceleration
versus time graphs. Questions ask students to find displacement, velocity, or
acceleration from a given graph or select a graph corresponding to one given or a
textual description. The TUG-K has been validated for high school students, but the
TUG-K2 variant was written specifically for high school students. The TUG-K is
similar in content to the FMCE, which contains 17 out of 47 questions about graphs
of motion, including graphs of force versus time, velocity versus time, and
acceleration versus time.

12

9.

“Assessing student learning of Newton’s laws: The force and motion conceptual
evaluation and the evaluation of active learning laboratory and lecture curricula,”
R. K. Thornton and D. R. Sokoloff, Am. J. Phys. 66 (4), 338–352 (1998). (E)

10.

“Testing student interpretation of kinematics graphs,” R. J. Beichner, Am. J. Phys.
62 (8), 750–762 (1994). (E)

11.

“A Mechanics Baseline Test,” D. Hestenes and M. Wells, Phys. Teach. 30(3),
159–166 (1992). (E)

12.

“Systematic study of student understanding of the relationships between the
directions of force, velocity, and acceleration in one dimension,” R. Rosenblatt and
A. F. Heckler, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 7(2), 1–20 (2011). (I)

13.

“Evaluation of the Impact of the New Physics Curriculum on the Conceptual
Profiles

of

Secondary

Students,”

Halloun,

I.

A.

at

<http://www.halloun.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4&Itemi
d=6> Beirut, Lebanon, (2007). (E)
14.

“The initial knowledge state of college physics students,” I. A. Halloun and D.
Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 53(11), 1043–1055 (1985). (E)

15.

“Gender Differences in Student Responses to Physics Conceptual Questions
Based on Question Context,” L. McCullough, in ASQ Advancing the STEM
Agenda in Education, the Workplace and Society, Stout, WI, 1–10 (2011). (E)

16.

“Differences in Male/Female Response Patterns on Alternative-format Versions of
the Force Concept Inventory,” L. McCullough and D. Meltzer, Physics Education
Research Conference 2001, Rochester, NY, 103–106 (2001). (E)

17.

“Impact of animation on assessment of conceptual understanding in physics,” M.

13

H. Dancy and R. Beichner, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 2(10104), 1–
7 (2006). (E)
18.

“Force concept inventory-based multiple-choice test for investigating students’
representational consistency,” P. Nieminen, A. Savinainen, and J. Viiri, Phys. Rev.
Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 6(2), 1–12 (2010). (E)

19.

“Can Assessment of Student Conceptions of Force be Enhanced Through
Linguistic Simplification? A Rasch Model Common Person Equating of the FCI
and the SFCI,” S. E. Osborn Popp and J. C. Jackson, Annual Meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA, 1-11 (2009). (I)

20.

“Comparing the force and motion conceptual evaluation and the force concept
inventory.” R. K. Thornton, D. Kuhl, K. Cummings & J. Marx, Phys. Rev. Spec.
Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 5 (010105), 1–8 (2009). (I)

2. Recommendations for Choosing a Kinematics and Forces Assessment
Use the FCI if you want a broad understanding of what your students understand
about kinematics and Newton’s laws, and lots of comparison data. Use the FMCE if
you want a more thorough understanding of what your students understand about
kinematics and Newton’s laws in one-dimension. Use the MBT in conjunction with
the FCI to assess more formal parts of your course. Use the FVA if you want to know
about your students’ understanding of the relationships between force, velocity, and
acceleration vectors. Use the TUG-K if you want to thoroughly assess your students’
understanding of motion graphs.

B. Energy
14

1. Overview of Energy Assessments
There are two RBAIs that cover energy: the Energy and Momentum Conceptual Survey21
(EMCS) and the Energy Concept Assessment22 (ECA). Research and development of
energy RBAIs has been occurring since the early 2000s to develop these multiple-choice
assessments for introductory classes at the university level.

The Energy and Momentum Conceptual Survey21 (EMCS) was designed for use in
standard first-semester introductory physics courses. It emphasizes energy and
momentum in common contexts that your students are likely to have seen in their courses,
e.g., carts on tracks, cart filling with rain, bouncing balls, etc.

The Energy Concept Assessment22 (ECA) was designed specifically to test conceptual
understanding of students in the Matter & Interactions (M&I) Mechanics course,23 which
is a first-semester introductory physics course with a radical change in content and
emphasis, focusing on the power of fundamental principles, on both the macroscopic and
the microscopic level. Because of this, only about half of the questions on the ECA align
well with the topics in a standard introductory course. The other half of the questions are
not emphasized or covered in a standard course, for example relativistic energy including
rest mass, quantized energy levels, and photon emission and absorption.

21.

“Multiple-choice test of energy and momentum concepts,” C. Singh and D.
Rosengrant, Am. J. Phys. 71 (6), 607–617 (2003). (E)

22.

“Designing an Energy Assessment to Evaluate Student Understanding of Energy

15

Topics,” L. Ding, Dissertation (2007). (I)
23.

“Matter & Interactions,” R. Chabay and B. Sherwood, Reviews in PER Vol. 1:
Research-based Reform of University Physics, E. F. Redish and P. Cooney, Eds.,
American Association of Physics Teachers, College Park, MD (2007). (E)

2. Recommendation for Choosing an Energy Assessment
The ECA contains questions about non-standard introductory course topics (discussed
above) while the EMCS contains more standard questions about energy and
momentum. Use whichever test more closely matches the content in your course.
Both tests were rigorously developed and tested and found to be reliable.
C. Rotation
1. Overview of Rotation Assessments
There are two tests about rotation: the Rotational and Rolling Motion Conceptual
Survey24 (RRMCS) and the Rotational Kinematics Inventory25–27 (RKI). Research and
development of rotational motion RBAIs has been occurring since the mid-2000s.
Both are multiple-choice and are used in introductory classes at the university level.

The Rotational and Rolling Motion Conceptual Survey24 assesses students’
understanding of rotational kinematics and kinetic energy, moment of inertia, torque,
and rolling motion. It is appropriate for introductory students in both algebra-based
and calculus-based courses.

16

The Rotational Kinematics Inventory has three parts: ‘Part 1: Particles’25 assesses
students’ understanding of angular velocity and acceleration of a particle in various
standard contexts (the hands of a clock, orbiting plants, swinging pendulum etc.),
‘Part 2: Particle in rectilinear motion’26 assesses students’ understanding of the
angular velocity and acceleration of a particle moving along a straight line where the
origin is not located on that line, ‘Part 3: Rigid body about a fixed axis’,27 assesses
students’ understanding of the rotational kinematics of rigid bodies like pulleys and
Ferris wheels. The RKI has been tested with high school students and upper-division
college students. Parts of this assessment would also be appropriate for introductory
college students. You can use all three parts of the RKI, or only the parts match the
content you cover in your course.

The RRMCS and RKI both cover rotational motion topics but with different
emphases. The RRMCS focuses on rotational motion concepts commonly taught in
introductory courses. The RKI covers these standard topics and also includes some
non-standard topics, e.g., a particle in rectilinear motion. Both tests use some physics
formalism, which means that the pre-test scores are likely not meaningful because
students don’t have enough background knowledge to understand the questions. The
RRMCS has been used at more institutions and with more students than the RKI.

24.

“Student understanding of rotational and rolling motion concepts,” L. G.
Rimoldini and C. Singh, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 1(10102), 1–9
(2005) (E)

17

25.

“An inventory on rotational kinematics of a particle: unravelling misconceptions
and pitfalls in reasoning,” K. K. Mashood and V. A. Singh, Eur. J. Phys. 33(5),
1301–1312 (2012) (E)

26.

“Rotational kinematics of a particle in rectilinear motion: Perceptions and pitfalls,”
K. K. Mashood and V. A. Singh, Am. J. Phys. 80(8), 720–723 (2012) (E)

27.

“Rotational kinematics of a rigid body about a fixed axis: development and
analysis of an inventory,” K. K. Mashood and V. A. Singh, Eur. J. Phys. 36(45020),
1–20 (2015) (E)

2. Recommendations for Rotation Assessments
Use the RRMCS to assess standard topics in calculus- and algebra-based introductory
physics courses and compare to others. Use the RKI if the content matches what you
teach in your course.
D. Intermediate Mechanics

The Colorado Mechanics/Math Methods Instrument28,29 (CCMI) is an open-ended
assessment of topics and skills commonly taught in a first-semester intermediate
classical mechanics course, including the ability to visualize a problem, correctly

18

apply problem-solving methods, connect math to physics, and describe limiting
behavior. The CCMI covers both content and mathematical skills though the
questions are largely conceptual, including reasoning, explanation, graphing, and
sketching. The CCMI does not cover all content in intermediate classical mechanics,
but rather a sample of important skills. CCMI responses are graded using a rubric.
This is the only RBA for intermediate classical mechanics.

28.

“Assessing Student Learning in Middle-Division Classical Mechanics/Math
Methods,” M. D. Caballero and S. J. Pollock, in Physics Education Research
Conference 2013, Portland, OR, 81–84 (2013). (E)

29.

“Issues and progress in transforming a middle-division classical mechanics/math
methods course,” S. J. Pollock, R. E. Pepper, & A. D. Marino, AIP Conf. Proc.
1413, 303–306 (2012). (E)

IV. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM ASSESSMENTS

19

RBAIs on electrostatics and magnetism (E&M) for introductory courses have been
around since the late 1990’s. There are six research-based assessments that cover
electrostatics and magnetism.

Four of these are for introductory courses: the Brief

Electricity and Magnetism Assessment30,31 (BEMA), the Conceptual Survey of Electricity
and Magnetism31,32 (CSEM), the Diagnostic Exam for Introductory, Undergraduate
Electricity and Magnetism33 (DEEM), and the Electricity and Magnetism Conceptual
Assessment34 (EMCA). There is one assessment specifically about symmetry and
Gauss’s law: the Symmetry and Gauss’s Law Conceptual Evaluation35 (SGCE). There is

20

one assessment which covers just magnetism concepts: the Magnetism Conceptual
Survey36 (MCS). There is also the Electromagnetics Concept Inventory (EMCI) suite of
assessments which includes EMCI-Waves, EMCI-Fields, and EMCI-Waves and Fields,37
which were developed for engineering courses and won’t be discussed further here.

For circuits, there are three: the Determining and Interpreting Resistive Electric
Circuits Concepts Test38 (DIRECT), the Electric Circuits Conceptual Evaluation39
(ECCE), and the Inventory of Basic Conceptions- DC Circuits40 (IBCDC). The
CSEM also contains some questions about circuits, but this is not its main focus.

More recently, RBAIs for upper-level courses have been developed. We discuss three:
the Colorado Upper Division Electrostatics Diagnostic-Free Response41 (CUE-FR),
the

Colorado

Upper

Division

Electrostatics

Diagnostics-Coupled

Multiple

Response42,43 (CUE-CMR), and the Colorado UppeR-division ElectrodyNamics
Test44 (CURrENT).

Introductory E&M RBAIs are summarized in Table V; upper-level ones are in Table
VI.
A. Introductory Level Electricity and Magnetism
1. Electrostatics and magnetism
The two most commonly used RBAIs for introductory electricity and magnetism courses
are the Brief Electricity and Magnetism Assessment (BEMA) and the Conceptual Survey

21

of Electricity and Magnetism (CSEM). The BEMA30 covers the main topics discussed in
both the traditional calculus-based E&M physics curriculum and the Matter and
Interactions23 curriculum including basic electrostatics, circuits, magnetic fields and
forces, and induction. BEMA questions are mostly qualitative questions with a few semiquantitative questions, which require simple calculations.

The CSEM32 is a broad survey of students’ knowledge of electricity and magnetism. It
aims to assess a range of topics across the standard introductory course content, but
without assessing every single topic covered in an introductory course. It is a
combination of a test of alternative conceptions and knowledge.

It also has a

combination of questions about the phenomena of electricity and magnetism and
questions about the formalism explaining the phenomena.

The BEMA and CSEM both cover basic topics covered in introductory electricity and
magnetism courses. They share six questions that are identical or nearly identical. CSEM
questions have only 5 answer choices, while BEMA questions have up to 10 possible
answers choices on some questions. The topics covered on the BEMA and CSEM vary
somewhat. The CSEM does not cover circuits, whereas the BEMA does (7 out of 31
questions). CSEM and BEMA scores were compared for one group of students, and on
average both pre- and post-test CSEM scores were higher than BEMA scores by 5-6%, a
statistically significant difference, with a moderate effect size.31 But the absolute and
normalized gains were similar for the BEMA and CSEM, so for this group of students,
both instruments measure learning in a similar way.

22

There are two other electricity and magnetism tests that haven’t been as commonly used
and validated: the Electricity and Magnetism Conceptual Assessment (EMCA) and
Diagnostic Exam for Introductory, Undergraduate Electricity and Magnetism (DEEM).
The multiple-choice conceptual questions on the DEEM33 measure students’
understanding of basic concepts of electricity and magnetism including electric and
magnetic fields and force, electrostatic potential and potential energy, Maxwell’s
equations, and induced currents. The questions align well with the topics commonly
taught in an introductory E&M course.

The DEEM is much longer than the CSEM or BEMA (66 questions versus 31 and 32
questions, respectively), so it covers topics much more thoroughly. The DEEM also
contains follow-up questions, where students should answer a subsequent question only if
they chose a certain answer(s) to a previous question. The DEEM, like the CSEM, does
not cover circuits. It also does not cover graphical representations of vector fields, or
conductors and insulators. About half the questions on the DEEM ask about the direction
of the electric field, magnetic field, velocity, electric potential, or force for different
situations.

The EMCA34 is a multiple-choice assessment of standard second-semester introductory
physics concepts including electrostatics, electric fields, circuits, magnetism, and
induction. The authors developed the EMCA so that it aligned well with the topics taught
in their course and so that it produced similar pre-test scores as the FCI for their student

23

population. The EMCA is easier than the BEMA or CSEM. The authors designed the test
this way so that on the pre-test students know the answers to some questions and gain
confidence in the course (as opposed to the BEMA and CSEM, which many faculty give
only as a post-test because students often score near guessing on the pre-test because they
are not familiar with the material), but the post-test can still be used to show mastery at
the end of the course.

There is only one assessment specifically about symmetry and Gauss’s law: the
Symmetry and Gauss’s Law Conceptual Evaluation35 (SGCE) which is designed for
students in introductory calculus-based physics, but can also be challenging to upperlevel students. The SGCE assesses students’ ability to identify situations where Gauss’s
law is applicable and use it to calculate electric field strength. The SGCE questions are
multiple-choice, and primarily conceptual, asking students about when and how to use
Gauss’s law, but not to explicitly calculate values. The BEMA has one question on
Gauss’s law, and the CUE-CMR and CUE-FR also ask questions which use Gauss’s law
and that are aimed at upper-level students.

The Magnetism Conceptual Survey33 (MCS) was developed to help instructors assess
difficulties their students have with magnetism concepts in introductory algebra-based
and calculus-based courses. It assesses standard topics in introductory courses up to
Faraday’s law. The MCS only covers magnetism and not electrostatics, so it follows that
it has more questions about magnetism than the BEMA, CSEM, DEEM, or EMCA. The

24

BEMA, CSEM, and MCS all cover charges in magnetic fields and magnetic field from
current carrying wires.

30.

“Evaluating an electricity and magnetism assessment tool: Brief electricity and
magnetism assessment,” L. Ding, R. Chabay, B. Sherwood, and R. Beichner , Phys.
Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 2(10105), 1–7 (2006). (E)

31.

“Comparing student learning with multiple research-based conceptual surveys:
CSEM and BEMA,” S. J. Pollock, AIP Conf. Proc. 1064, 171–174 (2008). (E)

32.

“Surveying students’ conceptual knowledge of electricity and magnetism,” D. P.
Maloney, T. L. O’Kuma, C. J. Hieggelke, & A. Van Heuvelen, Am. J. Phys. 69 (7),
S12–S23 (2001). (E)

33.

“Creation of a diagnostic exam for introductory, undergraduate electricity and
magnetism,” J. D. Marx, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Dissertation (1998). (I)

34.

“Electricity and magnetism conceptual assessment” M. W. Mccolgan, R. A. Finn,
D. Broder & G. Hassel, in preparation (2015). (E)

35.

“Student understanding of symmetry and Gauss’s law of electricity,” C. Singh,
Am. J. Phys. 74(10), 923–936 (2006). (E)

36.

“Developing a magnetism conceptual survey and assessing gender differences in
student understanding of magnetism,” J. Li and C. Singh, AIP Conference
Proceedings 1413, 43–46 (2012). (E)

37.

“Concepty Inventory Assessment Instruments for Electromagnetics Education,” B.
Notaros, Proceedings of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International
Symposium 1, 684–687 (2002). (E)

25

2. Recommendations for Choosing an Electricity and Magnetism Test
When teaching an introductory electricity and magnetism (E&M) course, use either the
CSEM, BEMA, or DEEM. If you would like to assess your students’ understanding of
circuits in addition to other standard E&M topics, use the BEMA or DEEM. The CSEM
and BEMA are used more commonly, so if having comparison data is important to you,
use one of these tests. If you want to assess your students’ understanding of magnetism
separately from other introductory E&M topics, use the MCS. Use the SGCE if you are
particularly interested in introductory physics students’ understanding of Gauss’s law, or
if you are making a change to your teaching about Gauss’s law and want to understand if
that change helped your students.
B. Circuits
1. Overview of Circuits Assessments
There are three RBAIs of circuits, the Determining and Interpreting Resistive Electric
Circuits Concepts Test38 (DIRECT), the Electric Circuits Conceptual Evaluation
(ECCE)39, and the Inventory of Basic Conceptions-DC Circuits40 (IBCDC). The CSEM
also contains some questions about circuits, but this is not its main focus.
The Determining and Interpreting Resistive Electric Circuits Concepts Test38
(DIRECT) was developed to evaluate students’ understanding of direct current (DC)
resistive electric circuits concepts. Overall, the multiple-choice questions weren’t
designed to assess a particular teaching method, except for a couple of questions about

26

microscopic aspects of circuits, which were closely aligned with the approach used in
Electric and Magnetic Interactions (part of the Matter and Interactions curriculum).
The Electric Circuits Concept Evaluation39 (ECCE) assesses students’ understanding
of both direct and alternating current circuits. About 80% of the questions are about DC
circuits and cover standard concepts around current, voltage, resistance, and brightness of
bulbs in circuits containing resistors and capacitors. The remaining 20% of the questions
are about AC circuits and ask students to match current versus time graphs to different
circuit configurations.39

Both the DIRECT and the ECCE ask similar conceptual questions about standard
introductory circuits topics, but also ask a couple of questions about non-standard topics:
microscopic aspects of current on the DIRECT and AC circuits on the ECCE. Some of
the questions on the ECCE have up to 10 answer choices. Also, some of the questions on
the ECCE have boxes for students to explain their reasoning. If you grade these short
answers, the ECCE could take longer to grade, but many instructors just skip grading
these.

The IBCDC is a multiple-choice assessment of DC circuits.40 The content on the
DIRECT and IBCDC is very similar, but the DIRECT has a stronger research base and
more comparison data.

38.

“Students’ understanding of direct current resistive electrical circuits,” P. V.
Engelhardt & R. J. Beichner, Am. J. Phys. 72 (1), 98–115 (2004). (E)

27

39.

“Teaching Electric Circuit Concepts Using Microconputer-Based Current/Voltage
Problems,” D. R. Sokoloff, Microcomputer-Based Labs: Educational Research and
Standards, Series F, Computer and Systems Sciences 156, R. F. Tinker, Ed. 129–
146 (1996). (E)

40.

“Evaluation of the impact of the new physics curriculum on the conceptual profiles
of

secondary

students”

I.

Halloun,

at

<http://www.halloun.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4&Itemid
=6> Beirut, Lebanon, (2007). (E)
2. Recommendations for Choosing a Circuits Assessment
Use the DIRECT if you want to assess standard introductory DC circuit concepts because
it has a stronger research base and is more commonly used, thus providing you with more
comparison data. Use the ECCE if you cover AC circuits and DC circuits. Use the
IBCDC if the content matches what you teach in your course more closely.
C. Upper Level Electricity and Magnetism

28

1. Electrostatics and Magnetism
The Colorado Upper Division Electrostatics Diagnostic-Free Response41 (CUE-FR)
contains open-ended, primarily conceptual questions that assess students’ understanding
of electrostatics topics (15 out of 17 questions) commonly covered in the first half of a
standard upper-division electricity and magnetism course. It also contains two questions
about magnetostatics. In addition to assessing E&M content, the CUE-FR assesses
several key skills such as the ability to choose a problem-solving method and defend that
choice, visualize a problem, connect math to physics, and describe limiting behavior.

The Colorado Upper Division Electrostatics Diagnostic-Coupled Multiple Response42
(CUE-CMR) was developed to cover the same content as the CUE-FR, but is easier to
grade. The questions on the CUE-FR and CUE-CMR are almost identical, but the answer
format is different.43 The CUE-FR has open-ended questions where students show work

29

and explain their reasoning. The CUE-CMR is a coupled multiple-response assessment
where students can choose multiple-responses to a given question and are awarded partial
credit depending on the accuracy and consistency of their answer. Students are first asked
to select the correct answer or easiest method to solve a problem, and then select a
‘reasoning element’ that supports their initial answer. Students get full credit for selecting
all the correct reasoning elements (and only the correct elements). Students can also
receive partial credit. A rubric is used to grade the free-responses to the CUE-FR. Partial
credit is also granted here. The CUE-FR has 17 questions, while the CUE-CMR has 16
questions (it is missing question 15 from the CUE-FR). On average, students score
similarly on the multiple-response version of the test as compared to the free-response
version of the test.

41.

“Colorado Upper-Division Electrostatics diagnostic: A conceptual assessment for
the junior level,” S. V. Chasteen, R. E. Pepper, M. D. Caballero, S. J. Pollock, K. K.
Perkins, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 8(20108), 1–15 (2012). (E)

42.

“Multiple-choice Assessment for Upper-division Electricity and Magnetism,” B. R.
Wilcox & S. J. Pollock, Physics Education Research Conference 2013, Portland,
OR, 365–368 (2013). (E)

43.

“Coupled multiple-response versus free-response conceptual assessment: An
example from upper-division physics,” B. R. Wilcox and S. J. Pollock, Phys. Rev.
Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 10(20124), 1–11 (2014) (I)

2. Recommendations for Choosing an Electricity and Magnetism Test

30

If you are teaching an upper-division E&M and want an assessment that is easy to grade
and compare to others, use the CUE-CMR. Use the CUE-FR if you want a more in-depth
look at the details of your students’ reasoning.
3. Electrodynamics
There is one assessment of upper-level electrodynamics: the Colorado UppeR-division
ElectrodyNamics Test44 (CURrENT). There is also the Electromagnetics Concept
Inventory37 (EMCI) which includes questions about electrodynamics, but was created for
engineering courses, so it will not be discussed further here.
The CURrENT is designed to assess fundamental skills and understanding of core
topics in the second semester of junior-level undergraduate electrodynamics covering
topics in Chapters 7 through 9 of Griffiths.45 The CURrENT is free-response in order to
assess the ability of upper-level students to generate and justify their own answers. The
CURrENT has a conceptual focus, though some mathematical manipulations are required.
The CURrENT pre-test contains three questions, while the post-test contains six
questions, as students do not have an a-priori familiarity with many of the topics before
taking the course. The CURrENT is graded with a rubric. Use the CURrENT to assess
your students’ understanding in second semester of junior-level undergraduate
electrodynamics.

44.

“Research-based

course

materials

and

assessments

for

upper-division

electrodynamics (E&M II),” C. Baily, M. Dubson, and S. J. Pollock, AIP Conf.
Proc. 1513, 54–57 (2013). (E)
45.

“Introduction to Electrodynamics,” D. J. Griffiths, 3rd Edition (Prentice Hall: 2007).
31

(E)
V. QUANTUM MECHANICS AND MODERN PHYSICS
There are seven tests covering modern physics and/or quantum mechanics content for
sophomore, junior, senior, and graduate level courses. These tests were developed
starting in the early 2000’s and until very recently. All cover a broad range of topics.
These tests are discussed below in groups based on the level of course they are
appropriate for. There are two additional graduate quantum mechanics surveys, but these
are not research-based and validated, so they will not be discussed further below.46,47
Intermediate-level tests, such as for Modern Physics courses, are summarized in Table
VII; ones for upper-level and graduate courses are in Table VIII.

46.

“Graduate Quantum Mechanics Reform,” L. D. Carr and S. B. McKagan, Am. J.
Phys. 77(4), 308–319 (2009).(E)

47.

“Student understanding of quantum mechanics at the beginning of graduate
instruction,” C. Singh, Am. J. Phys. 76(3), 277–287 (2008). (E)

32

A. Modern Physics
1. Relativity
The Relativity Concept Inventory48 is the only RBA that covers special relativity and
is for introductory undergraduate courses that cover relevant relativity topics. This is a
multiple-choice assessment where students are asked to also rate their confidence for
each question. Topics covered include time dilation, length contraction, relativity of
simultaneity, inertial reference frames, velocity addition, causality and mass-energy
equivalence. Use the RCI if you want to assess your students’ conceptual
understanding of special relativity and the effectiveness of your instruction.
48.

“Relativity concept inventory: Development, analysis, and results,” J. S. Aslanides
and C. M. Savage, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 9(10118), 1–10
(2013).

33

2. Intermediate Quantum Mechanics
There are three tests designed for sophomore-level quantum mechanics: the Quantum
Physics Conceptual Survey49,50 (QPCS), the Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Survey51
(QMCS) and the Quantum Mechanics Concept Inventory52 (QMCI). There is one
additional quantum assessment, the Quantum Mechanics Visualization Instrument
(QMVI), that can be used at multiple levels, including intermediate, upper-level, and
graduate quantum, so it will be discussed in the next section. It is not recommended to
give any of these tests as a pre-test because they all use basic vocabulary from quantum
mechanics that is not meaningful to students until they have some instruction on the
topics.
The Quantum Physics Conceptual Survey49,50 (QPCS) is a conceptual assessment
that can be used at the introductory level (if you have covered these topics) and in a
sophomore-level modern physics course. There are no equations on the QPCS and most
questions focus on wave-particle duality and the photoelectric effect (this is the only
quantum test which includes the photoelectric effect). Most of the questions are
structured in a way that asks the students about what happens when they do a specific
experiment. It was developed in Thailand and tested in Thailand and Australia.
The Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Survey51 (QMCS) is a highly conceptual
multiple-choice assessment for sophomore-level students. It was designed to evaluate the
effectiveness of instruction and only covers topics that faculty believe are important in a
modern physics course. Some of the questions on the QMCS probe ideas that students
have about quantum mechanics, as uncovered in student interviews. For example, one
question asks about electrons moving in sinusoidal paths, because interviews found that

34

this is how many undergraduates think about the motion of an electron. Some of the
QMCS questions also probe concepts that faculty value. A few of the questions on the
QMCS come from other tests (questions 10 and 11 are from the QMVI). Further, the
QMCS covers many quantum mechanics topics, but only has 12 questions, so is limited
in what it can tell you about what your students learned. The QMCS doesn’t explicitly
include equations, but it does ask students to think about qualitative relationships in
equations.
The Quantum Mechanics Concept Inventory52 (QMCI) is also very conceptual in
nature with no equations included and simple language. Questions are based on students’
ideas about quantum as documented in the literature. It is meant for sophomore and
junior-level students and was designed to diagnose students’ alternative conceptions
about quantum mechanics, so each answer choice is associated with a specific alternative
conception. Unlike the QMCS, the questions on the QMCI are about a narrow range of
topics, with most questions asking about tunneling through one-dimensional barriers. The
question format gives statements from a hypothetical student about a given concept and
your students have to pick which one they agree with. The QMCI has nine questions, so it
is limited in what it tells you about what your students learned.
49.

“Probing a deeper understanding of modern physics concepts,” T. L. Larkin, P.
Meade, and J. Uscinski, 41st ASEE/IEEE 2011 Frontiers in Education Conference,
S2H–1–S2H–6 (2011). (E)

50.

“Development and Use of a Conceptual Survey in Introductory Quantum Physics,”
S. Wuttiprom, M. D. Sharma, I. D. Johnston, R. Chitaree, R. & C. Soankwan,
International Journal of Science Education 31 (5), 631–654 (2009). (E)

35

51.

“Design and validation of the Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Survey,” S. B.
McKagan, K. K. Perkins, and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ.
Res. 6(20121), 1–17 (2010). (E)

52.

“Developing a quantum mechanics concept inventory”, J. Falk, Uppsala University
Dissertation (2004). (I)

3. Recommendations for Choosing an Intermediate Quantum Mechanics Assessment
If you are teaching a sophomore-level modern physics course, use the QMCS if you want
a broad overview of course topics and the QMCI if you want an in-depth test of onedimensional potential barriers, tunneling, and probability distribution. Use the QPCS if
you want to test photoelectric effect or a more in-depth treatment of wave particle duality.
Use QMVI if you want a very detailed look at the relationship between the wave function
and shape of potential. The QMVI contains questions from several levels of quantum
mechanics, so expect your sophomore-level students to do poorly on most questions.
B. Upper-level Quantum Mechanics and Beyond
There are three tests that are designed to assess students’ understanding of quantum at the
junior level: The Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Assessment53,54 (QMCA), The
Quantum Mechanics Assessment Tool55 (QMAT), and the Quantum Mechanics Survey56
(QMS). The Quantum Mechanics Visualization Instrument57 (QMVI) can be used at
several levels and will also be discussed in this section.
The Quantum Mechanics Conceptual Assessment53,54 (QMCA) is the newest
quantum mechanics assessment for a first-semester junior-level quantum mechanics
course. It was designed to assess students’ understanding of five main topics of quantum
36

measurement: the time-independent Schrödinger equation, wave functions and boundary
conditions, time evolution, and probability density. It was also designed to enable
comparisons of different teaching methods. The multiple-choice questions on the QMCA
were developed using the open-ended questions on the QMAT as a starting point. The
QMCA includes math formalism, but most of the questions rely on qualitative
understanding of the relationships between equations rather than quantitative calculations.
It contains many questions about the Schrödinger equation and a few about measurement
as a theoretical construct (e.g. given a wave function, make a measurement, what is the
new wave function). There are many questions that use infinite square well potentials and
a couple which ask students to think about non-standard potentials qualitatively. The
developers recommend using the QMCS as a post-test for sophomore level modern
physics classes. It could be used as a pre-test in graduate level quantum to see if students
have sufficient conceptual understanding of undergraduate level quantum topics.
The Quantum Mechanics Assessment Tool55 (QMAT) questions are open-ended and
mostly conceptual in nature. It was designed to measure student learning of concepts
most valued by faculty, assess students’ learning difficulties, and inform course
improvement. The content of the QMAT is based on working with faculty to determine
learning goals for quantum mechanics. A couple of the questions were taken from an
early version of the QMCS. The QMAT questions are a mix of conceptual and math
intensive questions, where students are asked to solve equations in some of the questions.
There is a rubric for grading the test, but the rubric requires extensive training to get
acceptable inter-rater reliability. Further, because this is an open-ended assessment it is
difficult to compare results to other institutions. There are limited validation studies of

37

the QMAT, and it has been archived by the developers, so you should use the QMCA,
unless you specifically want a short-answer test. Further, the QMCA has been more
thoroughly researched and validated.

The Quantum Mechanics Visualization Instrument57 (QMVI) is a multiple-choice exam
and was the first quantum mechanics survey created. It was designed to assess students’
understanding of quantum topics at all levels, from sophomore-level to graduate-level.
The topics covered are those that authors feel are important for students to learn in the
quantum sequence. The QMVI contains 25 questions at all different levels, with very
simple questions for sophomore-level students, and very difficult questions for graduatelevel students. Because of the variety in difficulty of the questions, it can be used to track
students’ progress throughout the quantum course sequence. Since it contains questions at
the graduate-level, it is a very difficult test. The QMVI contains extensive mathematical
formalism. Most of the questions are about the relationship between the shape of the
potential and the wave function, with an emphasis on visualizing this relationship. There
are a few questions about the uncertainty principle, and two questions about momentum
space probability distributions. Some of the questions require ‘tricks’ to figure out, e.g.,
making a symmetry argument makes a question very easy, but without the symmetry
argument, it is very difficult. The questions are multiple-choice, but also ask students to
give a 2-3 line written response and a rating of their confidence level. The developers
recommend giving it as an extended take-home exam, as it can take up to two hours for
students to complete.

38

The Quantum Mechanics Survey56 (QMS) is a multiple-choice assessment for the
junior and graduate-level. The QMS was designed to assess students’ conceptual
understanding of quantum mechanics, but also contains an extensive mathematical
formalism. Topics covered on the QMS are those that faculty find important for juniorlevel quantum mechanics courses. Although students don’t have to complete difficult
integrals to solve any of the questions, they do need to understand the basics of linear
algebra. The QMS has a wide range of topics including wave functions, the expectation
value of a physical observable and its time dependence, the role of the Hamiltonian,
stationary and non-stationary states and issues related to their time development, and
measurements.56 All questions are restricted to one-dimensional quantum mechanics
models.

The content covered by the QMS and QMCA is very similar, but the QMS is more
difficult and mathematical than the QMCA, and contains a lot more equations.

53.

“Constructing a Multiple-choice Assessment for Upper-division Quantum Physics
from an Open-ended Tool,” H. R. Sadaghiani, J. Miller, S. J. Pollock, & D. Rehn,
Physics Education Research Conference 2013, Portland, OR, 319–322 (2013). (E)

54.

“Quantum mechanics concept assessment: Development and validation study,” H.
R. Sadaghiani and S. J. Pollock, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res.
11(10110), 1–14 (2015). (E)

55.

“Transforming Upper-Division Quantum Mechanics Learning Goals and
Assessment,” S. Goldhaber, S. J. Pollock, M. Dubson, P. Beale, & K. K. Perkins,

39

AIP Conf. Proc. 1179 (1), 145–148 (2009). (E)
56.

G. Zhu and C. Singh, “Surveying students’ understanding of quantum mechanics
in one spatial dimension,” Am. J. Phys. 80(3), 252–259 (2012). (E)

57.

“Development and validation of an achievement test in introductory quantum
mechanics: the Quantum Mechanics Visualization Instrument (QMVI),” E.
Cataloglu, Pennsylvania State University, Dissertation (2002). (E)

1. Recommendations for Choosing an Upper-Level Quantum Mechanics Assessment
If you are teaching a junior- or senior-level quantum mechanics course, which test you
use depends on both the difficulty level and the range of topics you want to cover: In
terms of difficulty, the QMCS is at the lowest level, followed by the QMCI and QPCS,
then the QMCA, then the QMVI and QMS. In terms of content, all quantum RBAIs cover
some basic ideas about wave functions. The QMVI focuses in great depth on the
relationship between the wave function and the shape of the potential. The QPCS is the
only assessment that covers the photoelectric effect. The QMCI is entirely conceptual,
whereas the QMCA and QMS require some formalism.

VI. THERMODYNAMICS ASSESSMENTS

40

A. Overview of Thermodynamics Assessments
There are three RBAIs for thermodynamics concepts: The Thermodynamic Conceptual
Survey58 (TCS),

Thermal Concept Inventory59 (TCE), and Heat and Temperature

Conceptual Evaluation60 (HTCE). All of these assessments were developed for
introductory

level

courses.

The

Thermal

and

Transport

Concept

Inventory-

Thermodynamics61 (TTCI-T) and the Thermodynamics Concept Inventory62 (TCI) were
developed specifically for engineering courses, and will not be discussed further here. We
are not aware of any research-based assessments on statistical mechanics.
The Thermodynamic Conceptual Survey58 (TCS) is a multiple-choice conceptual
assessment of heat and temperature, the ideal gas law, and the first law of
thermodynamics for introductory physics courses. It consists of two parts with part one
covering temperature, heat transfer, and the ideal gas law and part two covering the first
law of thermodynamics. It is split into two parts so that you can choose the part(s) that
most closely match the content covered in your course. The questions on the TCS are all
either adapted from other thermodynamics tests or studies of students’ understanding of
thermodynamics topics. In addition to assessing your students’ understanding of these

41

thermodynamics topics, the authors suggest that the questions may be used as teaching
materials to help students overcome conceptual difficulties.

The Thermal Concept Inventory59 (TCE) is a multiple-choice assessment of heat transfer,
temperature change, and thermal properties of materials developed based on an inventory
of students’ alternative conceptions of thermodynamics from the research literature. It
was developed for third-year high school students and introductory college students in
Australia. The multiple-choice answers allow students to choose from ‘everyday physics’
answers or ‘classroom physics’ answers. Many questions consist of a conversation
between students and then statements about the opinions of the students involved in the
conversation. There are no diagrams or graphs.
The Heat and Temperature Conceptual Evaluation60,63 (HTCE) is a multiple-choice
conceptual assessment of heat, temperature, and heat transfer for introductory physics
courses. A majority of the questions are about heat transfer of various materials in cups
and about a third have to do with graphing temperature versus time.
The TCS shares many commonalities with the TCE and HTCE because its questions
were adapted from various other RBAIs or interview tasks. TCS questions 2, 4, 5, and 6
are the same as TCE questions 8, 11, 14, and 6. TCS questions 1 and 3 are the same as
HTCE questions 1 and 8. The TCS covers more thermodynamics concepts than either the
TCE or HTCE. TCS includes questions on the first law of thermodynamics and the ideal
gas law, whereas neither the TCE nor HTCE contain these topics. Some of the questions
on the TCS are also more complex than those on the HTCE or TCE. For example, there
is an explanation of a 5-step process of a gas being compressed by a piston, and students

42

are asked questions about work, heat, and energy at various points in the process. The
TCS is also the only thermodynamics test that asks students to interpret P vs. V graphs.

The heat and temperature concepts covered on the HTCE are very similar to those
covered on the TCE, though the questions on the TCE focus on students’ everyday
experiences of heat and temperature and many present conversations where students are
asked to indicate who they agree with. The HTCE and TCS are more formal and focus on
the content of thermodynamics in a physics course. The TCE would be better used as a
pre-test, because it focuses on everyday language. The HTCE has three questions about
temperature versus time graphs, whereas the TCE has no questions about graphs.

58.

“Development and Implementation of a Conceptual Survey in Thermodynamics,”
P. Wattanakasiwich, P. Taleab, M. D. Sharma, & I. D. Johnston, Int. J. Innov. Sci.
Math. Educ. 21 (1), 29–53 (2013). (E)

59.

“Introductory thermal concept evaluation: assessing students’ understanding,” S.
Yeo and M. Zadnik, Phys. Teach. 39(8), 496–504 (2001). (E)

60.

“Surveying Thai and Sydney introductory physics students’ understandings of heat
and temperature,” C. Tanahoung, R. Chitaree, C. Soankwan, M. Sharma, & I.
Johnston,

Proceedings of the Assessment in Science Teaching and Learning

Symposium (2006). (E)
61.

“Rigorous methodology for concept inventory development: Using the
“assessment triangle” to develop and test the thermal and transport science concept
inventory (TTCI),” R. A. Streveler, R. L. Miller, A. I. Santiago-Román, M. A.

43

Nelson, M. R. Geist, & B. M. Olds, Int. J. Eng. Educ. 27 (5), 968–984 (2011). (E)
62.

“Development of Engineering Thermodynamics Concept Inventory instruments,”
K. C. Midkiff, T. A. Litzinger, and D. L. Evans, in 31st ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in
Education Conference, F2A–3, Reno, NV (2001). (E)

63.

“Surveying Sydney Instroduction Physics Students’ Understanding of Heat and
Temperature,” C. Tanahoung, M. D. Sharma, I. D. Johnston, R. Chitaree, & C.
Soankwan, Australian Institute of Physics 17th National Congress, Brisbane
(2006). (E)

B. Recommendations for Choosing a Thermodynamics Assessment
Use the TCS if you want to assess the first law of thermodynamics in addition to other
topics such as temperature, heat transfer, phase change, and thermal properties of
materials. If you want to use a pre- and post-test use the TCE, because it uses everyday
language and ideas that would be familiar to students before a physics course. Further,
the format of the TCE where students answer questions about a student discussion could
help students get into the frame of mind of discussion and not test taking, which might
help you understand their ideas more deeply.
VII. OPTICS AND WAVES ASSESSMENTS

44

A. Optics
There is one assessment of geometrical optics, the Four-Tiered Geometrical Optics Test64
(FTGOT) which is intended for introductory college courses. The FTGOT has `four tiers’
of sub-questions for each main question and was developed in Turkey. These ask students
to answer a multiple-choice content question, rate their confidence in their answer,
indicate their reasoning (also multiple-choice) and then rate their confidence in their
reasoning. The test structure can give instructors more confidence that a correct answer to
the content question does actually indicate understanding by the student. The questions
on the FTGOT ask about observing oneself and observing others with plane mirrors,
spherical mirrors, and lenses. Use the FTGOT if you want to assess your students’
understanding of geometrical optics concepts at the introductory level.

64.

“Development and Application of a Four-tiered Test to Assess Pre-service Physics
Teachers’ Misconceptions about Geometrical Optics,” D. Kaltakci, Middle East
Technical University, Dissertation (2012).
45

B. Introductory Waves Assessments
There are three RBAIs about waves, two for introductory-level courses, the
Mechanical Wave Conceptual Survey65 (MWCS), the Waves Diagnostic Test66
(WDT) and one for upper-level courses, the Waves Concept Inventory67 (WCI).

The Mechanical Wave Conceptual Survey (MWCS)65 is a multiple-choice assessment
of basic wave concepts covered in introductory courses. It has also been tested with
high school students. The questions were created based on the open-ended questions
from the WDT. The MWCS has four subtopics including propagation, superposition,
reflection, and standing waves. Several questions on the MWCS ask students about
their reasoning in addition to their answer.

The Waves Diagnostic Test66 (WDT) has both free-response and multiple-choice
questions about mechanical and sound waves topics covered in a typical introductory
physics course. The main purpose of the WDT is to learn about students’ thinking
about waves, not to compare students’ scores to a baseline. The WDT elicits rich and
varied responses from students that show what they believe about waves and why.
This makes the WDT very useful as a benchmark, and allows you to more accurately
tailor your instruction to the incoming beliefs of your students. Because the WDT is
meant to understand students’ thinking, it is not scored. There are two parts to the
WDT, and students should complete and turn in part 1 before completing part 2.

46

The questions on the WDT and MWCS are very similar, since the MWCS was
developed from the WDT, but all the questions on the MWCS are multiple-choice,
whereas many of the questions on the WDT are free-response. The MWCS is scored
in the standard way (% correct) whereas the WDT is meant to be used to understand
your students’ ideas, and therefore is not scored.

65.

Developing, Evaluating and Demonstrating the Use of a Conceptual Survey in
Mechanical Waves. A. Tongchai, M. D. Sharma, I. D. Johnston, K. Arayathanitkul,
& C. Soankwan, Int. J. Sci. Educ. 31 (18), 2437–2457 (2009). (E)

66.

“Making Sense of How Students Come to an Understanding of Physics: An
Example from Mechanical Waves,” M. C. Wittmann, University of Maryland,
College Park, Dissertation (1998). (E)

1. Recommendations for Choosing a Waves Assessment
Use the MWCS to assess students’ understanding of mechanical waves in
introductory physics courses if you want to compare students’ scores before and after
your course with an assessment that is quick and easy to score. Use the WDT for
introductory courses if you want to understand your thinking about mechanical waves
in a more in-depth way.
C. Upper-Level Waves Assessments
The Waves Concept Inventory67 (WCI) is a multiple-choice assessment of upperdivision wave phenomenon content including visualization of waves, mathematical
47

depiction of waves, and wave definitions. It was designed to assess the effectiveness
of an integrated electrical engineering course covering quantum mechanics and
Schrödinger’s wave equation as well as Maxwell’s wave equations and their
application to the propagation of electromagnetic waves, though could also be
appropriate for an upper-division physics course. Some of the questions have more
than one correct answer, which more thoroughly assess students understanding of the
content. There are no calculational questions on the WCI, but students are asked about
mathematical equations (e.g. which linear partial differential equation can be used to
model wave propagation).

The concepts covered on the WCI are for upper-division engineering courses, though
could also be used at the upper-division in a physics department. The WDT and
MWCS are meant for introductory courses, so the content and level of these tests are
very different. Use the WCI for your upper-division course if the content on the test
aligns with what you teach in your class.
67.

“The wave concepts inventory-an assessment tool for courses in electromagnetic
engineering,” R. J. Roedel, S. El-Ghazaly, T. R. Rhoads, & E. El-Sharawy, 8th
Annu. Front. Educ. Conf. 2, 647–653 (1998). (E)

VIII. ASTRONOMY

48

There are eight RBAIs for astronomy, and all are designed for use in the introductory
astronomy course. Three of these, the Astronomy Diagnostic Test 2.068 (ADT2), the Test
of Astronomy Standards69 (TOAST) and the Astronomical Misconceptions Survey70
(AMS), contain questions about a wide range of topics covered in an introductory
astronomy course and can be used to assess the overall effectiveness of your course. Five
of these, the Star Properties Concept Inventory71 (SPCI), the Light and Spectroscopy
Concept Inventory72 (LSCI), the Newtonian Gravity Concept Inventory73,74 (NGCI), the
Lunar Phases Concept Inventory75 (LPCI) and the Greenhouse Effect Concept
Inventory76 (GECI) cover a more narrow range of content, and can be used to assess your
students’ understanding of specific content from your course. All of these RBAIs are
multiple-choice. All astronomy assessments are summarized in Table XI.

49

A. General Astronomy Assessments
The Astronomy Diagnostic Test 2.068 (ADT2) is a multiple-choice test for non-science
majors taking an introductory astronomy course and covers content commonly found in
the K-12 curriculum including seasons, lunar phases, motions in the sky, and size and
scale. It was designed to help instructors assess their students’ initial knowledge coming
into a college astronomy course, as the topics included were likely covered in K-12. The
ADT2 has been used in many introductory astronomy courses across the US, so there is a
lot of comparison data available.

The Test of Astronomy Standards69 (TOAST)

is a multiple-choice broad content

assessment of general astronomy content knowledge that is built on and from earlier
astronomy assessments (all the astronomy assessments included here). The content on the
TOAST was determined based on that which was deemed more important for
introductory astronomy students as described in expert position statements from several
professional organizations77,78 and later reviewed by 28 experts in astronomy. This makes
it a unique astronomy RBA, as the topics are broad, covering the whole intro course, and
are chosen based on based on consensus documents from the astronomy community.
Further, most of the questions are taken from other astronomy RBAIs.
The TOAST and ADT2 cover very similar content including phases of the moon,
motions in the sky, seasons, scale, distances, sizes, properties and lifecycles of stars,
gravity, and the universe. There are several questions that are the same on both tests since
the TOAST was created using questions from other astronomy assessments. The TOAST
contains questions about production of light (emission, absorption etc.), while both tests

50

ask about the relative speed of electromagnetic waves. There TOAST asks about the Big
Bang, and the ADT2 does not. The ADT2 has one question about global warming, and
the TOAST does not. Both tests are general assessments for introductory astronomy, and
have extensive comparison data available. They have both been well validated.
The Astronomical Misconceptions Survey70 (AMS) is a multiple-choice survey of
common misconceptions in introductory astronomy, e.g, the phases of the moon are
caused by the earth’s shadow or the seasons are caused by differences in the earth’s
distance from the sun. There are two versions of the AMS: the true/false version and the
multiple-choice version. The true/false version can be used to help instructors understand
the misconceptions their students come to their course holding. The multiple-choice
version can be given to students to help instructors understand the misconceptions their
students have or to assess the effectiveness of different types of instruction at addressing
these misconceptions. The questions on the AMS are not about a particular topic, but
instead a variety of topics for which students have commonly held incorrect beliefs.
Because the AMS is a test of students’ misconceptions about astronomy, the topics
covered and the focus of the questions is very different from the questions on the ADT2
and TOAST.
68.

B. Hufnagel, “Development of the Astronomy Diagnostic Test,” Astron. Educ.
Rev. 1(1), 47–51 (2002). (E)

69.

S. J. Slater, “The Development and Validation of The Test of Astronomy
STandards (TOAST),” J. Astron. Earth Sci. Educ. 1(1), 1–22 (2014). (E)

70.

B. M. C. Lopresto and S. R. Murrell, “An Astronomical Misconceptions Survey,”
J. Coll. Sci. Teach. 40(5), 14–22 (2011). (E)

51

B. Specific Astronomy Topic Assessments
The Star Properties Concept Inventory71 (SPCI) is a multiple-choice assessment of stellar
properties, nuclear fusion and star formation. It was developed in response to research on
students’ alternative conceptions about stars.79
The Light and Spectroscopy Concept Inventory72 (LSCI) is a multiple-choice test about
the electromagnetic spectrum and the nature of light meant for introductory astronomy
courses. These specific topics have been chosen because they were found to be central
topics common across most introductory astronomy courses. The more narrow range of
topics means that there are multiple questions probing each. The LSCI questions were
developed starting with expert opinions about the important core knowledge around light
and the electromagnetic spectrum. Students usually score near guessing (25%) on the pretest, implying that the LSCI is testing material unfamiliar to students who have not taken
an astronomy course. This is different than some other RBAIs where students come in
with ideas from everyday life that they use to answer test questions, and then score below
the guessing rate. The LSCI has been used in many introductory astronomy courses
across the US, so there is a lot of comparison data available.

The Newtonian Gravity Concept Inventory74 (NGCI) is a multiple-choice assessment of
gravity, a foundational topic in introductory astronomy courses. The questions are based
on student ideas about gravity and probe four conceptual dimensions including the
directionality of gravity, the force law, independence of other forces (e.g. gravity is not
affected by rotation) and thresholds related to gravity (e.g. there is not distance for which

52

gravity suddenly stops). The NGCI was developed for use in introductory astronomy
courses, but can also be used in introductory physics.

The Lunar Phases Concept Inventory75 (LPCI) is a multiple-choice assessment of lunar
phases concepts including cause and period of lunar phases, period and direction of the
Moon’s orbit, and observational phenomena. It is designed to assess students’ mental
models of lunar phases using a mathematical technique called model analysis theory75.
The result of this analysis is the probability of students in a course answering with the
correct model as well as the probability of answering with one of several incorrect
models. The LPCI can also be analyzed and scored in the more common way of finding
the percent correct on the pre- and post-test and then calculating the normalized gain.
Further, since the test content was developed based on students’ ideas about the lunar
phases, as opposed to expert opinions about the most important content related to lunar
phases, it is most appropriate to use the LPCI to understand your students’ thinking and
mental models, instead of how well their ideas match expert conceptions.

The Greenhouse Effect Concept Inventory76 (GECI) is a multiple-choice test about the
physics of energy flow through Earth’s atmosphere. The questions were developed after
extensive research on students’ beliefs about and models of the greenhouse effect. The
GECI is intended to help assess the effectiveness of instruction about the greenhouse
effect in introductory astronomy courses.

71.

“Development of a concept inventory to assess students’ understanding and

53

reasoning difficulties about the properties and formation of stars,” J. M. Bailey,
Astron. Educ. Rev. 6(2), 133–139 (2008). (E)
72.

“Development and Validation of the Light and Spectroscopy Concept Inventory,”
E. M. Bardar, E. E. Prather, K. Brecher, & T. F. Slater, Astron. Educ. Rev. 5(2),
103–113 (2006). (E)

73.

“Development and Calibration of a Concept Inventory to Measure Introductory
College Astronomy and Physics Students’ Understanding of Newtonian Gravity,”
K. E. Williamson, Montana State University, Dissertation (2013). (E)

74.

“Development of the Newtonian Gravity Concept Inventory,” K. E. Williamson, S.
Willoughby, and E. E. Prather, Astron. Educ. Rev. 12(1), 010107–1–010107–
010120 (2013). (E)

75.

“Developing the Lunar Phases Concept Inventory,” R. S. Lindell and J. P. Olsen,
Physics Education Research Conference 2002, 1–4, Boise, ID (2002). (E)

76.

“Part I: Development of a Concept Inventory Addressing Students’ Beliefs and
Reasoning DIfficulties Regarding the Greenhouse Effect Part II: Distribution of
Chlorine Measured by Themars Odyssey Gamma Ray Spectrometer,” J. M. Keller,
University of Arizona, Dissertation (2008). (I)

77.

“National Science Education Standards,” National Research Council, Washington
DC (1996). (E)

78.

“Project 2061: Benchmarks for Science Literacy,” American Association for the
Advancement of Science, Washington, DC (1986). (E)

79.

“Development and Validation of the Star Properties Concept Inventory,” J. M.
Bailey, B. Johnson, E. E. Prather, T. F. Slater, Int. J. Sci. Educ., 1–30 (2011) (E)

54

C. Recommendations for Choosing an Astronomy Assessment
Use one of the TOAST or ADT2 if you are making changes to your entire introductory
astronomy course, and want to measure the effectiveness of the change. Use the TOAST
if you want to assess students’ understanding of how light is produced in addition to other
standard introductory concepts. Use the ADT2 as a pre-test if you want to understand the
ideas your students bring to your course from their K-12 education. Use the AMS if you
are particularly interested in understanding your students’ misconceptions about
astronomy. If instead you are making changes to a specific portion of your course, use an
assessment of specific topics that match the content you are changing (SPCI, LSCI,
NGCI, LPCI or GECI). The developers of the LSCI point out that the topics covered on
the LSCI (electromagnetic spectrum and the nature of light) are foundational and central
in many astronomy courses, so you could use this test as a proxy for understanding the
effectiveness of your instruction for your course, even though it covers only a subset of
the material. Further, if comparing your students’ scores to others is important to you, use
either the ADT2 or LSCI, as there is a large amount of comparison data published. The
TOAST is a newer assessment, so there is less comparison data available now, but this
will likely change in the near future.
XI. CONCLUSION
Table XII summarizes the 46 RBAIs of physics and astronomy content discussed in this
resource letter. We have found RBAIs in nearly every major content area in physics, with

55

the exception of statistical mechanics. Most topics have RBAIs at both introductory and
the upper levels.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the other members of the PhysPort team
and KSUPER who worked on this project: John D. Thompson, Jaime Richards, Devon
McCarthy, and Brian Danielak. This work was partially supported by NSF grants PHYS1461251, DUE-1256354, DUE-1256354, DUE-1347821, and DUE-1347728.

56

