BKT-LSTM: Efficient Student Modeling
for knowledge tracing and student performance prediction
Sein Minn∗

arXiv:2012.12218v3 [cs.AI] 8 Jun 2021

Abstract
Recently, we have seen a rapid rise in usage of online educational platforms. The personalized education became crucially important in future learning environments. Knowledge
tracing (KT) refers to the detection of students’ knowledge
states and predict future performance given their past outcomes for providing adaptive solution to Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS). Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT) is a
model to capture mastery level of each skill with psychologically meaningful parameters and widely used in successful
tutoring systems. However, it is unable to detect learning
transfer across skills because each skill model is learned independently and shows lower efficiency in student performance
prediction. While recent KT models based on deep neural
networks shows impressive predictive power but it came with
a price. Ten of thousands of parameters in neural networks
are unable to provide psychologically meaningful interpretation that reflect to cognitive theory. In this paper, we
proposed an efficient student model called BKT-LSTM. It
contains three meaningful components: individual skill mastery assessed by BKT, ability profile (learning transfer across
skills) detected by k-means clustering and problem difficulty.
All these components are taken into account in student’s future performance prediction by leveraging predictive power
of LSTM. BKT-LSTM outperforms state-of-the-art student
models in student’s performance prediction by considering
these meaningful features instead of using binary values of
student’s past interaction in DKT. We also conduct ablation
studies on each of BKT-LSTM model components to examine their value and each component shows significant contribution in student’s performance prediction. Thus, it has
potential for providing adaptive and personalized instruction
in real-world educational systems.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Tracing (KT) is the assessment of students’ knowledge state dynamically and the prediction
of whether students may or may not answer a problem correctly based on past item test outcomes. KT
leverages machine learning and data mining techniques
to provide better assessment, enabling supportive learning feedback and adaptive instructions. By tracing the
knowledge state of the students, we can optimize instruction for individualization and personalization.
Knowledge Assessment methods (student models)
were initially proposed by psychometricians to analyse
and predict student performance in static data (e.g.
exam data) according to cognitive theory [1]. Early
state-of-the-art methods are either based on modeling
∗ Inria - Lille Nord Europe, France

of temporal latent variables or factor analysis with temporal features. In recent years, there has been increasing interest by researchers from computer science background to provide a solution to assess student’s knowledge proficiency and predict student performance by using data mining, machine learning and deep learning
techniques on dynamic data. A wide array of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Knowledge Representation techniques have been utilized in the field of ITS [4]. Most of
the main AI techniques have found their way into the
building of adaptive learning environments, and in particular for the problem of knowledge tracing, which aims
to model the student’s state of mastery of conceptual
or procedural knowledge from observed performance on
tasks [5]. Besides, it shows great success in student performance prediction than early student models [2, 3].
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) models, used in the
Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) approach [2], are a
more recent example.
Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT) is the earliest sequential approach to student modeling with psychologically meaningful parameters, which works on independent skills without considering learning transfer
across skill. While Piech [2] argued that DKT has the
ability to model some of the learning transfer occurring across skills by taking all past student’s interaction (binary values with associated skills). However all
these information is in hidden layer of LSTM with ten
of thousands of parameters and unable to provide psychologically meaningful interpretation [16].DKT shows
better predictive performance than the preceding approaches, in part because they are known to preserve
past information in sequential data, such as student outcome traces. Thus, we proposed an efficient student
model called BKT-LSTM, which contains three meaningful components : skill mastery of individual skills assessed by BKT, learning transfer detected by k-means
clustering and problem difficulty and then takes these
three components into account in student performance
prediction by using LSTM.
This paper is organized as follows: we review
knowledge assessment and knowledge tracing models
in section 2. Then we propose an efficient knowledge

tracing framework in section 3. We compare with
state-of-the-arts knowledge tracing models and perform
(2.2)
ablation studies in section 4. Finally, we conclude in
log P ({θi }, {βj }|D) =
section 5.

X

r log f (θi − βj ) + (1 − r)

(i,j,r,t)∈D

2

Background

In successful learning environments like Cognitive tutors
and the ASSISTments, KT plays as a mechanism for
tracing learners knowledge [6]. In these systems, each
problem is labeled with underlying skills required to
correctly answer that problem. KT can be seen as the
task of supervised sequential learning problem. The KT
model is given student past interactions with system
that includes: skills S = {s1 , s2 , .., st } [18] along with
responses R = {r1 , r2 , .., rt } and predict the probability
of getting correct answer for next problem is mainly
depends on mastery of corresponding skill s associated
with problems P = {p1 , p2 , .., pt } . So we can define the
probability of getting correct answer as p(rt = 1|st , X)
whereX = {x1 , x2 , .., xt−1 } and xt−1 = (st−1 , rt−1 ) is a
tuple containing response r to skill s at time t−1. Then,
we review here best known state-of-the-art KT modeling
methods for estimating student’s performance.

log(1 − f (θi − βj )) −
−

1X 2
θ
2 i i

1X 2
β + C.
2 j j

BIRT leverages the information of both items and students that directly interact in the system. Maximum a
posteriori (MAP) estimates of θi and βj are computed
by Newton-Raphson method. BIRT shows competitive
performance to Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT, a neural networks based knowledge tracing model mentioned
in section 2.4) in term of student performance prediction.

2.2 Bayesian
Knowledge
Tracing Bayesian
Knowledge Tracing (BKT) is the earliest sequential
approach to model a learner’s changing knowledge
state and is arguably the first model to relax the
assumption on static knowledge states. In original
2.1 Item Response Theory In standardized tests, BKT, a single skill is tested per item and the learner’s
students’ proficiency is assessed by one static latent state of skill mastery is inferred at each time step based
variable for example Rash Model [7] which shows a on a sequence of her previous outcomes [5].
strong theoretical background both in terms of being
grounded in psychometric measurement and a sound
mathematical framework. However, it is not possible
to perform cognitive diagnosis. IRT takes dichotomous
p(L0)
p(T)
p(T)
item response outcomes and assigns student i with a
K
K
K
proficiency θi , which is not changing during the exam.
Each item j has its own difficulty βj .
p(G)
P
P
The main idea of IRT is estimating a probability
p(S) P
that student i answers item j correctly by using student
ability and item difficulty,

(2.1)

Pij = logistic(θi − βj ) =

1
1 + eθi −βj

Figure 1: Architecture of BKT.

BKT takes four probabilities: P (L0 ): the prior
probability of a student knows the skill; P (T ): the
Where θ is the student proficiency on the topic probability a student, who does not currently know the
tested, and βj is the difficulty of item j.
skill, will know it after the next practice opportunity;
Recently Wilson et al. proposed a Bayesian exten- P (G): the probability a student guesses a question
sion of IRT (We will refer this model as BIRT) [9] which and gets a correct answer despite not knowing the skill
uses Bayesian approach and regularizes on logPij by im- (guess); and P (S): the probability a student answers a
posing independent standard normal prior distributions question incorrectly despite knowing the skill (slip).
In a typical learning environment with BKT, the
over each θi and βj .It maximizes on log posterior probability of {θi , βj } given the response data {r(i, j, t) ∈ D}, estimate of student mastery of a skill is continually
where response r ∈ {0, 1} and t is the time of each at- updated every time student gives a response to an item.
tempt.
The probability that a student knows the skill at time

t is:

It does not consider student proficiency θ, because
it assumes that θ cannot be estimated ahead of time in
adaptive situations [12].

(2.3)
P (Lt |1) =

P (Lt−1 )(1 − P (S))
P (Lt−1 )(1 − P (S)) + (1 − P (Lt−1 ))P (G)

2.4 Deep Knowledge Tracing Piech [2] introduced
Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) at the NIPS 2015
conference. Akin to BKT, it uses data in which
(2.4)
skills are tried and the performance outcome to predict
P (Lt−1 )P (S)
P (Lt |0) =
future sequence attempts. It encodes skill and student
P (Lt−1 )P (S) + (1 − P (Lt−1 ))(1 − P (G))
response attempt in a one-hot feature input vector as
input for each time t. The output layer provides the
(2.5) P (Lt ) = P (Lt |Action)+(1−P (Lt |Action))P (T ) predicted probability that the student would answer
that particular next problem correctly at time t + 1.
And the probability of student applying the skill corDKT uses Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to
rectly with problem at time t is computed as.
represent the latent knowledge space of students along
(2.6)
with the number of practices dynamically. This model
P (Ct ) = P (Lt−1 ).(1 − P (S)) + (1 − P (Lt−1 )).P (G)
compactly encodes the historical information from prewhere 0 represents incorrect attempt and 1 repre- vious time steps and determines what and how much
sents correct attempt for Action by student. First, the information to remember by using input gate, forget
probability that a student knows the skill before the re- gate and output gate of LSTM.
sponse is updated with Action by using the equations
Output
2.3 or 2.4 according to the response evidence. Then, the
y
y
y
y
system estimates the possibility that the student learns
the skill during the problem step by using equation 3.10.
Several extensions of BKT have been introduced,
h
h
h
h
h
Hidden layers
such as the contextualization of estimates of guessing
and slipping parameters, estimates of the probability of
transition from the use of help features, and estimates of
x
x
x
x
the initial probability that the student knows the skill.
One-hot encoded input
Item difficulty has also been integrated in this model.
0

2.3 Performance Factors Analysis Performance
Factor Analysis (PFA) was adapted from Learning
Factor Analysis (LFA, [11]) to allow the creation of a
“model overlay” that traces predictions for individual
students with individual skills so as to provide the
adaptive instruction to automatically remediate current
performance [12].
Pavlik et al. adapted the LFA model with sensitivity to the indicator of student learning performance.
The PFA model allows conjunction by summing the contributions from all skills needed in a performance. PFA
also relaxes the static knowledge assumption and models
multiple skills simultaneously [12]. Its basic structure is:

1

2

3

t

1

2

3

t

1

2

3

t

Figure 2: DKT unfolded architecture.
DKT uses large numbers of artificial neurons for
representing latent knowledge state along with a temporal dynamic structure and allows a model to learn
the student’s knowledge state from data. It is defined
by the following equations:
(2.8)

ht = tanh(Whx xt + Whh ht−1 + bh ),

(2.9)

yt = σ(Wyh ht + by ).

In DKT, both tanh and the sigmoid function are
applied element wise and parameterized by an input
X
weight matrix Whx , recurrent weight matrix Whh , initial
(2.7)
log Pij = βj +
(γk sik + ρk fik ),
state h10 , and output weight matrix Wyh . Biases for
k∈KCs
latent and output units are represented by bh and by .
where βj : the bias for the item j; γk : the bias for
Where xt is a one-hot encoded vector of the student
success attempt to skill k; ρk : the bias for failure interaction xt = {st , rt } that represents the combination
attempt to skill k; sik : the number of successful of which skill st was practiced with student response
attempts of student i on skill k; fik : the number of rt , so xt ∈ {0, 1}2M according to number M of unique
skills. The output yt is a vector of number of skills,
failure attempts of student i on skill k.

In the training process, the initial value of both the
where each value represents the predicted probability
that the student would answer that particular problem key and the value matrices are learned. Each slot of the
with associated skill correctly. Thus the prediction of key memory are embedded with concepts and is fixed in
rt+1 of next problem associated with skill st+1 can be the testing process.
retrieved from vector of yt .
3 Proposed model: BKT-LSTM
We propose a student model called BKT-LSTM which
can predict student’s future responses by utilizing three
meaningful features: individual skill mastery of a student assessed by BKT and learning transfer (across
skills) detected by k-means clustering and problem difficulty.

P(st)
ft
∑.

mt
v

v

Mt-1

Mt+1

v

Mt

1-

Not learned

softmax
k

M

et

at

sigmod

tanh

kt
st

vt
xt

p(T)

Learned

p(L0)
p(G)
p(S)
Incorrect

p(G)
p(S)
correct

Figure 3: DKVMN architecture.

Figure 4: Example of standard BKT structure.

2.5 Dynamic Key-Value Memory Networks for
Knowledge Tracing DKVMN was proposed as an alternative to DKT that is inspired from the memory
network architecture [13]. It utilises an external memory neural network module and uses two memory slots
called key memory and value memory to encode the
knowledge state of students. Assessments of knowledge
state on particular skills are stored in memory slots and
controlled by read and write operations through additional attention mechanisms. DKVMN calculates attention weight of inputs by using key memory, which
is immutable, and reads and writes to the corresponding value memory. DKVMN takes a skill st as query,
estimate the probability of response p(rt |st ) to the problem with associated skill st , and then updates the value
memory with skill and response xt {st , rt }. Note that
DKVMN consumes more memory storage than DKT.
The overall model architecture of DKVMN is shown
in Figure 3. Unlike DKT, DKVMN applies read and
write operations to perform knowledge state transitions in memory rather than unstructured state-tostate knowledge transformation in hidden layer of DKT.
Knowledge state of a student student is traced by reading and writing to the value memory slots using attention weight computed from input skill and the key memory slots. It comprises three main steps: Reading, Prediction and Writing. In addition to these three steps,
two other processes should be mentioned, Optimization
and Attention. See [13] for more details.

3.1 Assessing skill mastery The formulation is
inspired by Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT), a well
known knowledge tracing model with psychologically
meaningful parameters. BKT is a Markov model to
infer mastery states, from “not learned” to “learned”
and to the extent the probabilities above depend either
on fixed parameters and on the state in the previous
time step t − 1 in Fig 4. As we mentioned in section 2.2,
we apply brute-force search algorithm to fit BKT. We
have P (L0 ), P (T ), P (G), P (S) of each skill after fitting
BKT. BKT is based on skill specific modeling and able
to provide skill mastery of each skill P (st ) = P (Lt−1 )
according to:
(3.10)
P (Lt−1 ) = P (Lt−1 |Action)+(1−P (Lt−1 |Action))P (T )
Note that: skill mastery is not binary value and
which is the probability of learning skill st rather than
the probability of student applying the skill correctly
P (Ct ) . Besides, each skill model is learned independently with four parameters. So, the time t in BKT
only represents number of trials student practised only
on each specific skill. Other interleaved skills are ignored during modeling of that skill. So it doesn’t consider learning transfer across skills.
3.2 Learning Transfer A strong limitation of BKT
is skill independent. When a student is tried on a new

skill, the learning she has gained on previous skills is not
considered relevant to the new skill tried. This is known
as the learning transfer mechanism that is lacking in
BKT and in most KT models.
Intuitively, learning transfer across skills is a naturally occurring phenomena. Most people would agree
with the observation that general domain knowledge accumulates through practice and allows the student to
solve new problems in the same domain with greater
success, even if that problem involves new and specific
skills. Learning transfer implies that students are able
to transfer their acquired skills to new situations and
across problems involving different skills set. Models
such as Learning Factor Analysis (LFA[11]) and Performance Factor Analysis (PFA[12]) aim to capture this
learning transfer phenomena by including a factor that
represents the learning accumulated on all KCs through
practice and include this factor as a predictor of success
in further practice. These models have been shown to
outperform the standard BKT model in general, and
have given rise to further research on the subject.
In BKT, learning transfer is ignored when the
prediction is performed. So the model can not evaluate
which type of learning transfer that student achieved at
current time interval in long term learning process. Skill
mastery is estimated independently without considering
learning transfer across skills. In DKT, LSTM uses
single state vector to encode the temporal information
of student knowledge state with corresponding transfer
learning and performs state-to-state transition globally
and unable to assess the mastery of skills and it’s ability
profile for learning transfer.
3.2.1 Detecting ability profile : To detect the regularities on changes of learning transfer (ability profile
of a student) over series of time intervals in long-term
learning process, we refined the method proposed in
DKT-DSC [14] for better simplicity without scarifying
it’s originality and performance. It divides student’s interactions into multiple time intervals, then encodes student past performance for estimating her ability profile
in current time interval. The ability profile ab is encoded
as a cluster ID and computed from the performance vector (with Equation 3.12) of length equal to the number
of skills, and updated after each time interval by using
all previous attempts on each skill. The success rates on
each skill from past attempts data are transformed into
a performance vector for clustering student i at time
interval 1:z as follows (for brevity we omit indexing all
terms by i in equation 3.11):

(3.11)

R(xj )1:z =

z
X
(xjt )
t=1

(3.12)

|Njt |

,

di1:z = (R(x1 )1:z , R(x2 )1:z , ..., R(xn )1:z ),

where
• xjt : the attempts of skill xj being correctly answered at time interval t; successful attempts are
set to 1 and 0 otherwise;
• |Njt |: the total number of practices of skill xj up
to time interval z;
• n: the total number of skills;
• R(xj )1:z represents ratios of skill xj being correctly
answered from time interval 1 to current time
interval z by student i. This is computed for all
skills (x1 , x2 , .., xn );
• di1:z represents a performance vector of student i on
all skills from time interval 1 until z.
Each student may have a different number of total
time intervals in the lifetime of their interactions with
the system (see Figure. 5).
If a student’s time interval has no attempt between
interval 0 : z, we apply 0.5 for success rate, R(xj )1:z .
So data contains encoded vector of student’s past
performance and it is accumulated and updated after
each time interval. Time interval z and student i are
ignored in training process and only used in clustering
process later. Then k-means algorithm is used to evaluate the temporal long-term learning ability of students
in both training and testing at each time interval z by
measuring euclidean distance with centroids achieved
after training process as like in DKT-DSC [14] and assigning into nearest cluster and applied label of cluster
abz as temporal student learning ability at time interval
z Evalution is started after first 20 attempts and then
after every 20 attempts have been made by a student.
For first time interval, every student is assigned with
initial ability profile 1 as described in Fig 5 (Right).
By adding this cluster ID abz (ability profile) of
what group the student belongs to, we ensure that
these high-level skill profiles are available to the model
for making its predictions throughout the long term
interaction with the tutor
3.3 Calculating problem difficulty The integration of problem difficulty do predict student performance is a distinct feature. We calculate problem difficulty by using method suggested in [15, 3]. Calculation

Find Clusters

Temporal learning ability

Find the centroids for
each student group

Student ID

Training
Data

Testing
Data

group students
Assign student into
a student group
at each time interval

students

Training
Data

Time intervals

Time Interval ID

Figure 5: Evaluation process of student’s learning ability (Left) and Detecting ability profile at each time interval
in long-term learning process of random 56 students in ASSISTments 2009 dataset (Right)
of the difficulty level is reconfigured for more details.
Note that, in this study, we assume each problem is
associated with a single skill, but the difficulty is associated with problems, not with skills themselves.
The difficulty of a problem, pj , is determined on a
scale of 1 to 10. This scale is used as an index into
the one-hot vector: a value of 1 is set to the cell with
the corresponding difficulty level, and 0 for all others.
Problem difficulty level P D(Pj ) is calculated as:
(
δ(pj ), if |Nj |≥ 4
(3.13) difficulty level(pj ) =
5,
else
where:
P|Nj |
(3.14)

δ(pj ) = modulo10

i

Oi (pj )
· 10
|Nj |

!

and where
• pj : problem j
• Nj is the set of students who attempted problem pj
• Oi (pj ) the outcome of the first attempt from student i to problem pj , 1 if a success, 0 otherwise
δ(pj ) is a function that maps the average success
rate of problem pj onto (10) levels. Unseen problems,
those that do not have any record, and problems with
less than 4 students (|Nj |< 4) in the dataset, will have
a difficulty level of 5.
Figure 6 shows the distributions of successes and
failures over skills as a function of problem difficulty,
and along the number of opportunities of practice over
that skill. As expected, more failures are found at the
higher difficulty levels, and also at early attempts over
a given skill. Notice also that failures after a number of
attempts on a given skill do occur, but only at the higher
problem difficulty levels. These results demonstrate
that problem difficulty does play an important role on
the chances of success or failures to a problem, even for
well practiced skills.

Figure 6: a student’s responses in different levels of
problem difficulty at each trial: red is incorrect response
and green is a correct response.
3.4 BKT-LSTM To handle all deficiencies described in above, we proposed a novel model called
BKT-LSTM by leveraging advantageous of predictive
power of LSTM. BKT-LSTM contains three meaningful components: skill mastery assessed by BKT, learning transfer evaluated by k-means clustering and problem difficulty. BKT-LSTM predict student performance
based on both of evaluated temporal student’s ability
profile that capture learning transfer, assessed mastery
of skills from BKT simultaneously and take difficulty
level of a problem in performance prediction. In BKTLSTM, we defined LSTM by following equations:
(3.15)
(3.16)

ht = tanh(Whx [ft ] + Whh ht−1 + bh ),
yt = σ(Wyh ht + by ).

Both tanh and the sigmoid function are applied
elrt+1 ement wise and parameterized by an input weight
matrix Whx , recurrent weight matrix Whh , and output
weight matrix Wyh . Biases for latent and output units
are represented by bh and by . The input features ft =
{P (st ), abz , P D(Pj )} contains assessed skill mastery
M (st ) of student i on skill s at time t, temporal ability

K1

h0

K2

Concact

h1

y1

h2

y2

ht

yt

K1N
s

p(Lt)
# of BKT models

ft

Student’s Ability Profile

Difficulty Level (Pj)

Figure 7: Architecture of BKT-LSTM.
profile abz indicates the cluster ID Cluster(stuiz ), the
Table 1: Overview of datasets
temporal ability profile abz of student i at current time
Number of
interval z, and P D(Pj ) represents problem difficulty of
Dataset Skills Problems Students Records
Pj at time t. (for brevity we omit indexing all terms
Algebra
437
15663
574 808,775
by student i from here on). The output yt is represents
ASS-09
123
13002
4,163 278,607
the predicted probability that the student would answer
ASS-14
100
NA
19,840 683,801
that particular problem with associated skill correctly.
Thus the prediction of of problem associated with skill
1
st can be retrieved from vector of yt as described in tional settings: 1) ASSISTments : an online tutoring system that was first created in 2004 which engages
Fig7.
middle and high-school students with scaffolded hints
3.4.1
Optimization: To improve the predictive per- in their math problem. If students working on ASSISTformance of RNN based models, we trained with the ments answer a problem correctly, they are given a new
cross-entropy loss l between probability of getting cor- problem. If they answer it incorrectly, they are provided
rectly of problem j with skill s: pt = p(Pjs ) and actual with a small tutoring session where they must answer a
few questions that break the problem down into steps.
response rt for all RNN based models as follows:
Datasets are as follows: ASSISTments 2009-2010 (skill
builder), ASSISTments 2014-2015. 2) Cognitive Tutor.
Algebra 2005-2006 2 :is a development dataset released
X
in KDD Cup 2010 competition from Carnegie Learning
(3.17)
l=
(rt log pt + (1 − rt ) log(1 − pt )),
of PSLC DataShop. For all datasets, only first correct
t
attempts to original problems are considered in our experiment. We remove data with missing values for skills
It is to prevent overfitting during training, dropout
and problems with duplicate records. To the best of
was applied to ht when computing the prediction yt , but
our knowledge, these are the largest publicly available
not when computing the next hidden state ht+1 .
knowledge tracing datasets.
In this experiment, we assumed every 20 attempts
4 Experimental Study
made by student as a time interval for that student. The
4.1 Datasets In order to validate the proposed total number of temporal values for student’s learning
model, we tested it on three public datasets from two
1 https://sites.google.com/site/assistmentsdata/
distinct tutoring scenarios in which students interact
2 https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/KDDCup/downloads.jsp
with a computer-based learning system in the educa-

Table 2: AUC result for all tested datasets
Datasets
Models
ASS-09 ASS-14 Algebra
BIRT
0.75
0.67
0.81
PFA
0.70
0.69
0.76
BKT
0.65
0.61
0.64
DKT
0.72
0.70
0.78
DKVMN
0.71
0.71
0.78
BKT-LSTM
0.80
0.71
0.85

Table 3: RMSE result for all tested datasets
Datasets
Models
ASS-09 ASS-14 Algebra
BIRT
0.44
0.44
0.37
PFA
0.45
0.42
0.39
BKT
0.47
0.51
0.44
DKT
0.45
0.42
0.38
DKVMN
0.45
0.42
0.38
BKT-LSTM
0.41
0.42
0.35

ability used in our experiment is 8 (7 clusters and
1 for initial ability before evaluation in initial time
interval for all students). Five fold cross-validations
are used to make predictions on all datasets. Each
fold involves randomly splitting each dataset into 80%
training students and 20% test students of the each
datasets. For Input of DKVMN, Initial values in both
key and value memory are learned in training process.
For other models, one hot encoded method is applied.
Initial values in value memory represents for initial
knowledge state as prior difficulty for each skill and fixed
in testing process.
We compare next problem student performance
prediction of our model with state-of-the-art models
mentioned in above: Bayesian extensions of BIRT [9],
BKT [5], PFA [12], DKT [2], DKVMN [13]. But we do
not compare with other variant models, because those
are more or less similar and do not show significant
difference in performance. We implement the all NN
models with Tensorflow and LSTM based models share
same structure of fully-connected hidden nodes for
LSTM hidden layer with the size of 200 for DKT. For
speeding up the training process, mini-batch stochastic
gradient descent is used to minimize the loss function.
The batch size for our implementation is 32. We train
the model with a learning rate 0.01 and dropout is
also applied for avoiding over-fitting.We set the number
of epochs into 100. All these models are trained and
tested on the same sets of training and testing students.
For BKT, we learn models for each skill and make
predictions separately and the results for each skill are
averaged.

imum test AUC=0.80 when compared to DKT with
AUC=0.72 and DKVMN has AUC=0.71. On the ASSISTments14 dataset, BKT-LSTM achieved maximum
test AUC=0.70 only. In the latest ASSISTments14
dataset (which contains more students and less data
compared to other three datasets and without problem
information) and a bit lower to DKVMN.
In Table 3, when we compare the models in term of
RMSE, BKT is minimum 0.46 in ASSISTments09, and
ASSISTments14, and 0.44 in Algebra. RMSE results
in all dataset with maximum of 0.40 for BKT-LSTM
while all other models are no more than 0.42. According
to these results, BKT-LSTM shows better performance
than DKT, DKVMN and significantly than other models in Algebra, ASSISTments09, ASSISTments14.

4.2 Results In Table 2, BKT-LSTM performs significantly better than state-of-the-art models in tested
datasets. On the Algebra dataset, compared with the
DKT and DKVMN which has an maximum test AUC
of 78, 0.81 in IRT, 0.76 in PFA and 0.64 for BKT, but
BKT-LSTM has 0.85 with a notable gain of 10% to original DKT and DKVMN .In ASSISTments09 dataset,
BKT-LSTM also achieves about 10% gain with max-

4.3 Ablation studies The results have so far suggest there may be different impacts of each factor on
the predictive performance of NN based models, and in
particular the impact of item difficulty. This question
is further analyzed in this section.
We compare our BKT-LSTM model through an
ablation study with following factor combinations:
• BKT-LSTM-1: skill mastery.
• BKT-LSTM-2: skill mastery and ability profile.
• BKT-LSTM-3: skill mastery and problem difficulty.
• BKT-LSTM-4: skill mastery, ability profile and
problem difficulty.
In BKT-LSTM-1, it takes only skill mastery into account for student performance prediction which achieve
higher performance than original BKT and have lower
performance than DKT (where DKT takes only binary values of student previous interaction). When
BKT-LSTM-2 takes skill mastery and ability profile of
a student, it shows similar performance as DKT and
much higher than BKT. It shows better performance
than DKT while BKT-LSTM-3 takes skill mastery and

Table 4: AUC result for ablation study
Datasets
Models
ASS-09 ASS-14 Algebra
BKT-LSTM-1
0.686
0.680
0.730
BKT-LSTM-2
0.720
0.701
0.743
BKT-LSTM-3
0.792
0.702
0.849
BKT-LSTM-4
0.802
0.707
0.851

Table 5: RMSE result for ablation study
Datasets
Models
ASS-09 ASS-14 Algebra
BKT-LSTM-1
0.451
0.426
0.398
BKT-LSTM-2
0.439
0.421
0.394
BKT-LSTM-3
0.416
0.421
0.355
BKT-LSTM-4
0.409
0.420
0.353

the models (including BIRT, see Tables 2 and 3) show
similar performance, because it does not have problem
information in dataset and we cannot calculate problem
difficulty for each problem.
5

Contribution

Neither BKT nor DKT method is a perfect method for
assessing knowledge mastery (knowledge tracing) and
student performance prediction at the same time, but,
when combined, they account for different aspects of a
model and provide us better understanding with these
meaningful features. We proposed a student model
called BKT-LSTM with three meaningful components:
student’s skill mastery (probability of learning a skill),
ability profile (learning transfer of a student) and problem difficulty to predict student performance. Not like
DKT and DKVMN, which only take student past interaction (binary values) and learn all information in
hidden state. BKT-LSTM can predict the student performance by summarizing information from skills, problems and student ability profiles. Experiments with
three datasets show that the proposed model performs
statistically and significantly better in predictive performance than state-of-the-art KT models. Dynamic evaluation of student’s ability profile at each time interval
and problem difficulty at each time step plays critical
roles and helps BKT-LSTM to capture more variance
in the data, leading to more accurate and personalized
performance predictions.

problem difficulty. Our proposed model BKT-LSTM4 shows better performance than any state-of-the-art
methods compared in this experiment. We conducts
our analysis through Area Under Curve (AUC), Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and the Square of Pearson correlation (r2 ).
The results are reported in tables 4, 5 and 6. Although ability profile provides indication in student
ability evolution in student long-term learning process.
It has mostly improved in student performance prediction around 2 to 4 % in BKT-LSTM 2 and 4 compared References
to BKT-LSTM 1 and 3. Results from each model with
different combination of factors show us which compo[1] Templin, J., Henson, R. A., et al. 2010. Diagnosnents provide more information in student performance
tic measurement: Theory, methods, and applications.
prediction among various datasets. In there, we can also
Guilford Press.
see that the problem difficulty factor is the most influ[2] Piech, C., Bassen, J., Huang, J., Ganguli, S.,
ential factor to student performance prediction. When
Sahami, M., Guibas, L. J., and Sohl-Dickstein, J.
we apply problem difficulty to BKT-LSTM, it increases
2015. Deep knowledge tracing. In Advances in neural
information processing systems. 505–513.
around 8 to 10 % respectively. It also reflects that is
[3]
Minn, S., Desmarais, M. C., Zhu, F., Xiao, J., and
why BIRT shows better performance in student perforWang, J. 2019. Dynamic student classiffication on
mance prediction among other models (except neural
memory networks for knowledge tracing. In Pacificnetworks based models with problem difficulty see TaAsia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
bles 2, 3, 4 and 5). For ASSISTments14 dataset, all of

Table 6: r2 result for ablation study
Datasets
Models
ASS-09 ASS-14 Algebra
BKT-LSTM-1
0.095
0.079
0.146
BKT-LSTM-2
0.142
0.100
0.165
BKT-LSTM-3
0.228
0.102
0.32
BKT-LSTM-4
0.255
0.106
0.328

Mining. Springer, 163–174.
[4] Nkambou, R., Mizoguchi, R., and Bourdeau, J.
2010. Advances in intelligent tutoring systems. Vol.
308. Springer Science & Business Media.
[5] Corbett, A. T. and Anderson, J. R. 1994. Knowledge tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedural
knowledge. User modeling and user-adapted interaction 4, 4, 253–278.
[6] Desmarais, M. C. and d Baker, R. S. 2012. A
review of recent advances in learner and skill modeling
in intelligent learning environments. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction 22, 1-2, 9–38.

[7] Hambleton, R. K., Swaminathan, H., and Rogers,
H. J. 1991. Fundamentals of item response theory,
Sage.
[8] Briggs, D. C. and Wilson, M. 2003. An introduction to multidimensional measurement using rasch
models.
[9] Wilson, K. H., Karklin, Y., Han, B., and Ekanadham, C. 2016. Back to the basics: Bayesian extensions
of irt outperform neural networks for proficiency estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02336.
[10] d Baker, R. S., Corbett, A. T., and Aleven, V.
2008. More accurate student modeling through contextual estimation of slip and guess probabilities in
bayesian knowledge tracing. In International conference on intelligent tutoring systems. Springer, 406–415.
[11] Cen, H., Koedinger, K., and Junker, B. 2006.
Learning factors analysis–a general method for cognitive model evaluation and improvement. In International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
Springer, 164–175.
[12] Pavlik Jr, P. I., Cen, H., and Koedinger, K. R.
2009. Performance factors analysis–a new alternative
to knowledge tracing. Online Submission.
[13] Zhang, J., Shi, X., King, I., and Yeung, D.-Y.
2017. Dynamic key-value memory networks for knowledge tracing. In Proceedings of the 26th international
conference on World Wide Web. 765–774.
[14] Minn, S., Yu, Y., Desmarais, M. C., Zhu, F.,
and Vie, J.-J. 2018. Deep knowledge tracing and
dynamic student classification for knowledge tracing.
In 2018 IEEE International conference on data mining
(ICDM). IEEE, 1182–1187.
[15] Minn, S., Zhu, F., and Desmarais, M. C. 2018. Improving knowledge tracing model by integrating problem difficulty. In 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE, 1505–
1506.
[16] Khajah, M., Lindsey, R. V., and Mozer, M. C.
2016. How deep is knowledge tracing? arXiv preprint
arXiv:1604.02416.
[17] Fu, Shunkai, Yao Zhang, and Sein Minn, On the Recommender System for University Library International
Association for Development of the Information Society,ERIC, 2013.
[18] Minn, Sein and Desmarais, Michel C and Fu, ShunKai
Refinement of a Q-matrix with an Ensemble Technique Based on Multi-label Classification Algorithms
European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning,Springer, 2016.

