AITutor-EvalKit: Exploring the Capabilities of AI Tutors
Numaan Naeem* , Kaushal Kumar Maurya∗ ,
Kseniia Petukhova and Ekaterina Kochmar
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{Numaan.Naeem, kaushal.maurya, kseniia.petukhova, ekaterina.kochmar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

arXiv:2512.03688v2 [cs.CL] 23 Feb 2026

Abstract

What is the name of 5 sided polygon?

We present AITutor-EvalKit, an application
that uses language technology to evaluate the
pedagogical quality of AI tutors, provides software for demonstration and evaluation, as well
as model inspection and data visualization.
This tool is aimed at education stakeholders as
well as *ACL community at large, as it supports learning and can also be used to collect
user feedback and annotation.

1

Student

Try to recheck your answer.
MI

ML

PG

AC

TSE

NO

NO

NO

Great try! an octagon has 8 sides. Think 'penta-'
for five, like 'octa-' for eight.

Introduction

Personalized one-on-one tutoring has long been
recognized as a highly effective educational approach (Bloom, 1984). Yet, its widespread adoption is constrained by the limited availability of
qualiﬁed tutors (Wang et al., 2024b) and the high
costs associated with tutor training (Kelly et al.,
2020), among other impediments (Yoon et al.,
2007; Boyd et al., 2008). An alternative to human
tutoring is provided by AI tutoring systems, especially those relying on recent advances in large language models (LLMs), such as Khanmigo (Khan,
2024) and Tutory.1 Despite the remarkable success of LLMs in various tasks (Minaee et al.,
2024), their adoption in education is hindered by
lack of a clear understanding of what these models are capable of (Tack et al., 2023; Jurenka
et al., 2024) and how pedagogically useful they
are (Macina et al., 2023b), which results in lack of
trust on the part of key educational stakeholders.
With the fast development of LLMs and their easy
integration into learning tools, questions about the
evaluation of AI-driven tutor performance become
increasingly relevant (Kosmyna et al., 2025). The
goal of our tool is two-fold: (1) via the opensource and open-access code, we provide a practical, customizable and versatile evaluation tool that

MI

ML

PG

AC

Yes

Yes

Yes

TSE

Figure 1: This example shows a sample dialogue and its
pedagogical-ability evaluation by the LoMTL model using the
AITutor-EvalKit. The evaluation follows the four dimensions from Kochmar et al. (2025): MI (Mistake Identiﬁcation), ML (Mistake Location), PG (Providing Guidance), and
AC (Actionability). TSE: To some extent.

can be applied to a variety of educational scenarios; and (2) via informative demonstrations, we
aim to raise awareness of the stakeholders (e.g.,
students and teachers) as well as practitioners interested in the state of the art in AI in Education
(i.e., *ACL community at large) of the current capabilities of LLMs-as-tutors. Although our tool is
an early research prototype, through its extendable
nature, we aim to facilitate research in this exciting
and emerging area of applied NLP research.
The current version of our tool focuses on
the pedagogical quality evaluation of tutor responses in the context of Student Mistake Remediation (SMR) (Boaler, 2013; Handa et al.,
2023) in the mathematical domain, where tutors
address errors or misconceptions that hinder students’ progress (Wang et al., 2024a,b; Macina
et al., 2023a). As the foundation for evaluation,
we use the established taxonomy from Maurya
et al. (2025), which is grounded in the learning

* Equal contribution.
1

a octogon

Tutor

https://tutory.io

1

sciences principles and which allows us to assess
the quality of tutor responses along four key SMR
dimensions (Kochmar et al., 2025): (1) mistake
identiﬁcation, concerned with whether tutor’s response notiﬁes the student of the committed mistake; (2) mistake location, focusing on whether the
tutor clearly points to the erroneous part in the student’s solution; (3) providing guidance, evaluating
the quality of the pedagogical guidance; and (4)
actionability, assessing whether tutor’s response
makes it clear what the student should do next.
These dimensions are further outlined in Table 3,
with an illustrative example provided in Figure 1.
The structure and implementation of the frontand backend of our tool are described in Section 3.
Using MRBench dataset (Maurya et al., 2025) and
taking inspiration from the BEA 2025 shared task
on AI tutor response evaluation (Kochmar et al.,
2025), we introduce a novel, efﬁcient, and lightweight multi-task learning model that addresses
the four dimensions of pedagogical quality evaluation (§3.1). The outputs of the model, as well as
those of an open-source (Prometeus (Kim et al.,
2024)) and a commercial (GPT-5) LLMs used as
judges, are displayed using an interactive browserbased UI with helpful visualizations (§3.3). The
evaluation results (§4) suggest that while our
model achieves competitive results when evaluated against gold standard annotation, its outputs
are also perceived by users to be at least as accurate as those of the commercial LLM-as-judge
models, and the UI is considered informative and
easy to use. We present and publicly release:

locally with the user’s own data and models following the instructions provided in the
GitHub repository.
• A short video demonstrating the tool available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=9qgDfrhzOvg.

2 Related Work
Over the years, the NLP community has seen signiﬁcant advances in the development of publicly
available toolkits for modeling and evaluation, including Hugging Face Transformers (Wolf, 2019),
NLTK (Bird, 2006), and Scikit-learn (Pedregosa
et al., 2011). These toolkits have enhanced code
reusability, enabling researchers to focus on developing more sophisticated models and metrics.
However, in the educational domain, especially
in conversational dialogues, there remains a lack
of robust tools to push research boundaries. Some
progress has been made with frameworks like ConvoKit (Chang et al., 2020), which facilitates the
manipulation and analysis of general conversational data, and the social interactions embedded
within. More recently, Edu-ConvoKit (Wang and
Demszky, 2024) was developed for preprocessing, annotation, and analysis speciﬁcally for educational dialogues. While these toolkits contribute
signiﬁcantly to data handling and analysis, they
fall short of addressing the evaluation of pedagogical quality in AI-driven educational systems. To
the best of our knowledge, there is no toolkit that
supports on-the-ﬂy assessment of the pedagogical
abilities of AI tutors. With AITutor-EvalKit, we
aim to ﬁll this critical gap by providing an opensource toolkit for the systematic evaluation of AI
tutors. The toolkit integrates a popular taxonomy
proposed by Maurya et al. (2025) into an automated evaluation framework. It is also designed
to be extensible to additional evaluation aspects
such as the ones proposed by Macina et al. (2025),
who augment pedagogical assessment with measures of student expertise and understanding. By
supporting and unifying such evaluation methods,
AITutor-EvalKit aims to facilitate progress in
this underexplored yet important research area.

• The ﬁrst of its kind, open-access and opensource model aimed at evaluation of the
pedagogical quality of AI tutor responses
available at MIT-licensed python repository: https://github.com/kaushal0494/
AITutor-EvalKit. We believe it to be useful
for AI-in-Education practitioners and developers, as it is highly customizable, allowing
researchers to apply it to further educational
contexts and dialogues, as well as to extend it
to other scenarios and domains.
• An interactive UI available at https://
demo-ai-tutor.vercel.app, which communicates the results and showcases the capabilities of AI tutors in an interpretable way,
which we consider to be of interest to education stakeholders and the *ACL community at large. The demo tool can also be run

3 System and Demonstration Description
AITutor-EvalKit consists of two major modules: backend and frontend, with the pipeline
illustrated in Figure 2. The backend module includes several models for tutor response evalu2

Dialogues
Example N

Mistake Identification

LoMTL Model: LoRA-based
Multi-task Learning

Example 2
Example 1

Mistake Location

Topic: Geometric lines
Tutor: What is the name..
Student: A octogon
GPT4: Good try ...

Providing Guidance

LLM-as
-a
-Judge

Open-Source LLMs
Family of GPT
Models
Evaluation

Actionability

Backend Module

Frontend Module: User Interface

Figure 2: AITutor-EvalKit pipeline: The backend module includes several model options to assess the pedagogical soundness of tutors’ responses, and the frontend presents evaluation outputs in an interactive user interface.

ation, and frontend seamlessly integrates these
evaluation outputs with an interactive, customizable, and ﬂexible UI. Different audience groups
can beneﬁt from different functionalities of the
toolkit: e.g., researchers and developers can use
both modules, train their own automated models,
use their own datasets, and launch the demo UI locally, while teachers, policymakers and other educational stakeholders can use the frontend module
to understand the capabilities of LLMs-as-tutors
and make decisions accordingly.
3.1

3.2.1 Dataset
As discussed in Section 1, we used MRBench
dataset by Maurya et al. (2025), which has 491 dialogues (300 in the development set and 191 in the
test set), each paired with seven LLM-generated
tutor responses and one or two human tutor responses. Each response is annotated by human
annotators for each of the four dimensions using
the categories “Yes,” “To some extent,” and “No.”
We also created a randomly selected demonstration set consisting of 10 dialogues, which is a subset of the test set. More details on the dimensions,
annotation, and data statistics can be found in Appendix A.

Backend Module: Evaluation Models

The backend module has two components: a specialized automated evaluation model and an evaluation pipeline for LLMs-as-judges. In this section,
we provide details on the task, the training data
(for the automated evaluation model), the test data,
and the automated evaluation model itself, as well
as the usage of an open-source LLM and a closedsource GPT model as judges.
3.2

3.2.2 Specialized Automated Model: LoMTL
This component implements a ternary classiﬁer to
evaluate tutor responses across the four considered dimensions. The models developed by participants in the BEA shared task provide a good
starting point, as summarized by Kochmar et al.
(2025). However, upon closer inspection, we
found that several teams relied on closed-source
models, fully ﬁne-tuned and LoRA-tuned models,
and some even used multiple models or ensembles for each dimension, which makes these approaches difﬁcult to scale across all dimensions.
Considering this, we propose a novel LoRAbased multi-task model (called LoMTL) that ﬁnetunes a single small LLM in a LoRA setting
across all four dimensions, each treated as a
task in a multi-task learning setting. This modeling is naturally suited to the four tasks, all
of which are ternary, closely related classiﬁcation problems, allowing them to beneﬁt from
shared learning during training. Additionally,
we use sampling and balanced batching methods to improve performance. We observe that a
small google/gemma-2-2b-it (Team et al., 2024)
model using LoMTL achieves performance compet-

Student Mistake Remediation Task

This task considers mathematical educational dialogues between a student and a tutor, where
interactions are driven by student’s mistakes or
confusions, and the AI tutor aims to remediate
them through pedagogically appropriate responses.
Formally, let the conversation history be H =
{(T1 , S1 ), (T2 , S2 ), . . . , (Tt , St )}, where Ti and
Si denote the tutor’s and student’s i-th utterances,
respectively. Let Sk , k ∈ [1, . . . , t], denote the
most recent student’s utterance containing a mistake or confusion; the tutor then produces Tt+1 to
address it. The proposed toolkit evaluates the pedagogical quality of Tt+1 along eight dimensions
deﬁned by Maurya et al. (2025).
3

itive with the top-performing teams in the shared
task while remaining highly efﬁcient and scalable.
Appendix B presents more details on model development, prompts, conﬁguration, and comparative
results with the BEA shared task’s top-performing
teams.

cal abilities of AI tutors in educational dialogues.
Users can explore the demo in two modes: (1) a
Static Mode, where educators can access a deployed version containing 10 conversations from
the MRBench test set evaluated by our ﬁne-tuned
model and share feedback on the helpfulness of tutor responses; and (2) a Customized Mode, where
developers can run the interface locally to analyze
their own datasets using either our LoMTL model or
their own one, supported by the provided code (the
exact step-by-step details are supplied in the ofﬁcial GitHub README ﬁle2 ). The UI consists of
three key modules Automated Evaluation, LLM
Evaluation, and Visualizer, that together enable
exploration, analysis, and visualization of the key
aspects of educational dialogues.

3.2.3 LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation
This component provides functionality for evaluation using LLMs-as-judges. Following Maurya
et al. (2025), we have selected Prometheus2 (Kim
et al., 2024) as the primary open-source LLM.
However, the implementation of this module is
ﬂexible enough to support the family of Llama
and other open-source causal LLMs for evaluation.
Additionally, we have included an option to evaluate using the closed-source OpenAI GPT-5 model,
although the implementation supports any model
from the GPT family. Users must provide their
OpenAI API key to run evaluations. We selected
the above two models considering their open- and
closed-source nature, as well as their human-like
performance on public benchmarks (Kim et al.,
2024). However, the codebase is ﬂexible enough
to require only minimal adaptation to support
other LLMs.

• Automated Evaluation provides automated
evaluation results using our LoMTL model on
4 evaluation dimensions.
• LLM Evaluation leverages LLMs-as-judges
for human-aligned evaluations.
• Visualizer enables rich visual analytics for
interpreting evaluation scores across 4 pedagogical dimensions on the MRBench development set.
The UI supports the selection of evaluation
methods and provides instant visualization of performance metrics through plots, bar charts, and
spider graphs.

3.2.4 Flexible Design
Each of the three evaluation setups (automated
evaluation, evaluation with open-source LLMs,
and evaluation with closed-source GPT models)
provides high degree of ﬂexibility in the choice
of the base LLM, prompting strategy, and hyperparameter tuning. For example, each evaluation
setup has its own prompting ﬁle and conﬁguration,
allowing users to customize and use the components of the tool as per their needs. Evaluation can
be run using the following short commands:

3.3.1 Automated Evaluation UI
The Automated Evaluation module presents results generated by our LoMTL model, assessing AI
tutors across four pedagogical dimensions. As
shown in Figure 6, users are ﬁrst presented with
an overview panel summarizing key statistics such
as the number of topics, models, dimensions, and
conversations. Users can evaluate a single tutor or
compare two tutors side by side.
Single Tutor Evaluation: In this mode, users
select a problem topic to view the complete
student-tutor dialogue in the “Context” block (Figure 7). A drop-down menu allows selection of
a tutor model, and the corresponding response is
displayed in the “Tutor Response” block. Users
can rate the usefulness of the response (Helpful,
To Some Extent, or Not Helpful) and optionally
view the ground truth solution for better context.
Upon clicking “Get Auto-Evaluation Results,” the

# Training LoMTL model
cd src/autoeval && ./lora_finetune_runner.sh
# Evaluation with automated (i.e., LoMTL) model
cd src/autoeval && ./lora_evaluation_runner.sh
# Evaluation with open-source LLM
cd src/llmeval &&
python run_open_llm_as_judge_evaluation.py
# Evaluation with GPT5
cd src/llmeval && ./gpt5_eval_runner.sh

3.3

Frontend Module: Demo App

We present an interactive prototype built on top
of MRBench, designed to evaluate the pedagogi-

2

https://github.com/kaushal0494/
AITutor-EvalKit/blob/main/README.md

4

system generates performance evaluations across
the chosen dimensions, with results downloadable
in a PNG, JPG, or JSON format. The “Best Performance by Dimension” panel highlights the top
tutor(s) for each dimension, helping users quickly
identify their pedagogical strengths.
Tutor Comparison Mode: This mode allows
users to directly compare two tutors by enabling
the “Tutor Comparison Mode” option. The selected tutors’ responses are displayed side by side
(Figure 8), and users can provide quick feedback
indicating which tutor performed better or mark
both as equally good or bad. After choosing the
evaluation dimensions and clicking “Compare Tutor Responses,” the interface presents a detailed
two-column comparison of scores across all selected dimensions. To facilitate interpretation, the
“Comparison Visualization” panel (Figure 9) provides four interactive views: the Summary view
highlights the leading tutor for each evaluation dimension and identiﬁes the overall winner; the Spider Chart offers a radar-style visualization comparing performance patterns across dimensions;
the Bar Chart displays side-by-side scores for
each dimension; and the Differences view illustrates the magnitude of score gaps between tutors. All visualizations can be exported in PNG
or JPG formats for reporting or analysis. Finally,
the “Best Performance by Dimension” panel summarizes the comparative strengths of the tutor pair,
providing a concise overview of pedagogical differences. This mode supports structured, interpretable, and visually grounded benchmarking of
AI tutor performance.
3.3.2

a speciﬁc problem using an LLM as a judge. After selecting the problem, tutor, and LLM judge,
users can generate dimension-wise evaluation results that reﬂect the LLM’s assessment of the tutor’s pedagogical performance. A “Best Performance by Dimension” panel highlights the topperforming tutor(s) for each dimension.
Tutor Comparison Mode: This mode enables side-by-side comparison of two tutor models on the same problem, judged by a selected
LLM. Tutor responses are displayed together
(Figure 11), and upon comparison, the system
presents dimension-wise evaluations and visualizations such as Summary, Spider Chart, Bar
Chart, and Differences to clearly show relative
strengths across pedagogical aspects.
Judge Comparison Mode: This mode compares how different LLM judges evaluate the same
tutor response. The tutor’s response is displayed
once, and evaluations from both judges are presented in parallel with corresponding visualizations. This feature helps assess consistency between LLM judges and identify possible biases in
their evaluations.
Together, these modes enable ﬁne-grained, interpretable analysis of tutor behavior, offering insights into both model performance and evaluation
reliability across different judging LLMs.
3.3.3 Visualizer UI
The Visualizer module provides a high-level
overview of the MRBench development set, using gold-standard annotations across four evaluation dimensions through intuitive visual analytics. Users are ﬁrst presented with a “Dataset
Overview” panel summarizing key statistics, including the number of conversations, tutor models, and evaluation dimensions. This module includes three main visualization panels: Tutor Performance Summary, Visualization Controls, and
Dataset Visualization.
The Tutor Performance Summary panel
presents average scores for each tutor model
across all four dimensions, where “Yes,” “To some
extent,” and “No” correspond to 1.0, 0.5, and 0.0,
respectively (Figure 12). The Visualization Controls panel allows users to select speciﬁc tutors
and dimensions to generate detailed visualizations
(Figure 13). The Dataset Visualization panel then
displays the results through spider and bar charts,
where spider plots (the most informative visualizations from our perspective) summarize tutors’

LLM Evaluation UI

The LLM Evaluation module enables advanced
pedagogical assessment of AI tutor responses using LLMs as judges. It extends the functionality
of the automated evaluation pipeline by leveraging
LLMs to judge and compare tutor responses across
four pedagogical dimensions. The UI supports
three evaluation modes: single tutor evaluation,
tutor model comparison, and LLM judge comparison. As shown in Figure 10, the overview panel
summarizes available topics, conversations, tutor
models, evaluation dimensions, and judge LLMs,
providing a quick snapshot of the evaluation setup.
Currently, two LLM judges are supported: GPT-5
and Prometheus-7B-v2.0 (Kim et al., 2024).
Single Tutor Evaluation: This mode allows
users to analyze how a selected tutor performs on
5

strengths and weaknesses across dimensions (Figure 14), while bar charts show detailed score distributions for selected dimensions (Figure 15), along
with averages for each response label.
This visual analytics module enables users to explore and interpret pedagogical quality effectively,
supporting comparative analysis and data-driven
insights. The same functionality is also available
in the customized mode, allowing developers to visualize and analyze their own datasets locally in a
similar way.

Model

LoMTL (ours)
Prometheus2
GPT-5

Full Test Set

Demonstration Set

Accuracy

Macro-F1

Accuracy

Macro-F1

0.72
0.47
0.66

0.60
0.41
0.58

0.68
0.41
0.66

0.55
0.34
0.59

Table 1: Accuracy and macro-F1 scores (averaged
across Mistake Identiﬁcation (MI), Mistake Location
(ML), Providing Guidance (PG), and Actionability
(AC)) for LoMTL, Prometheus2, and GPT-5 on the full
test set from Kochmar et al. (2025) and on the demonstration set. Best results are shown in bold.

To assess the toolkit and evaluation models, we
ﬁrst measure models’ performance using the metrics from the BEA 2025 shared task (Kochmar
et al., 2025) – accuracy and macro-F1, and then
conduct a human evaluation study, in which participants assess both the prediction quality of the
LoMTL evaluation model and the usability of our
demo tool and UI.

Performance across dimensions: The perdimension results, presented in Table 2, show that
Prometheus2 performs poorly, while our model
notably outperforms GPT-5 on the Mistake Identiﬁcation and Actionability dimensions. However, it
underperforms GPT-5 by 3 and 6 percentage points
in terms of macro-F1 for Mistake Location and
Providing Guidance, respectively. A similar trend
is observed in the ten dialogues used for demonstration.

4.1

4.2 Extrinsic Evaluation: Human Study

4

Evaluation

Intrinsic Evaluation: Quantitative
Analysis

Participants were given access to the demo website, detailed guidelines, and an evaluation form.
The form instructed them to assess three components: the Automated Evaluation tab, the LLM
Evaluation tab, and the Visualizer tab, as detailed
in Section 3.3. For the ﬁrst two tabs, participants
were asked to explore at least ﬁve different dialogues, review at least two tutor responses per dialogue, and use the feedback ﬁeld to rate each response as helpful, helpful to some extent, or not
helpful. They also examined the model’s evaluation for each response across at least one assessment dimension. Additionally, for each dialogue, participants compared at least one pair of
tutor responses in comparison mode and indicated
which response they considered a better one. After using Automated Evaluation tab, they reported
how frequently they agreed with the model’s judgments on a 1-5 scale, both in single-response and
comparison modes. In the LLM Evaluation tab,
participants evaluated how often they agreed with
GPT-5 and Prometheus2, again in both modes.
They were also asked which evaluation model they
perceived as more accurate: GPT-5 or the model
from the ﬁrst tab (which corresponds to our LoMTL
model), and Prometheus2 or the model from the
ﬁrst tab. Finally, in the Visualizer tab, participants
explored visualizations for at least two tutors and

For intrinsic evaluation, we compare our LoMTL
model’s predictions on the test set from Kochmar
et al. (2025) with the gold human annotations and
also run GPT-5 and Prometheus2 on the same data.
The average results across evaluation dimensions,
presented in Table 1, show that Prometheus2 performs substantially worse than both our model and
GPT-5. Our model achieves the highest averaged
accuracy and macro-F1 on the full test set, and it
also performs competitively on the demonstration
subset. While GPT-5 achieves a slightly higher
averaged macro-F1 on the demonstration subset,
the overall trend indicates that our model provides
more reliable evaluations than Prometheus2 and
performs on par with, or better than, GPT-5. A
close inspection of the confusion matrix between
human annotations and the LoMTL model shows
strong overall agreement, with the majority of instances concentrated on the diagonal, particularly
for clear Yes (3,106) and No (1,057) cases. However, the model exhibits systematic confusion on
borderline instances and a mild tendency to overpredict Yes, especially when humans assign To
some extent or No labels. Extended results and
a related discussion, including average precision
and recall scores, are provided in Table 7 in Appendix C.
6

Model

Full Test Set
Accuracy

LoMTL (ours)
Prometheus
GPT-5

Demonstration Set
Macro-F1

Accuracy

Macro-F1

MI

ML

PG

AC

MI

ML

PG

AC

MI

ML

PG

AC

MI

ML

PG

AC

0.86
0.58
0.67

0.67
0.53
0.68

0.63
0.31
0.70

0.70
0.46
0.58

0.66
0.48
0.53

0.55
0.42
0.58

0.54
0.32
0.61

0.65
0.43
0.55

0.76
0.48
0.67

0.69
0.41
0.64

0.60
0.42
0.67

0.68
0.32
0.66

0.57
0.34
0.53

0.50
0.30
0.56

0.47
0.38
0.59

0.65
0.30
0.64

Table 2: Accuracy and macro-F1 scores of our model, Prometheus, and GPT-5 across Mistake Identiﬁcation (MI),
Mistake Location (ML), Providing Guidance (PG), and Actionability (AC) on the full test set from Kochmar et al.
(2025) and on the demonstration set. Best results are shown in bold.

rated how informative they found them on a 1-5
scale. For every tab, participants also rated the
ease of use on a 1-5 scale. The full questionnaire
is provided in Appendix C.
A total of 14 participants took part in the study.
Their educational background included individuals pursuing a Master’s degree, those holding a
Master’s degree, and those holding a PhD. Eleven
participants had teaching experience, and eight
had prior experience using an AI tutor.
Most participants perceived the LoMTL evaluation model as more accurate in its judgments than
both GPT-5 and Prometheus2. As shown in Figure 3, the majority of participants agreed with
the LoMTL model’s assessments more than half of
the time in both single-response and comparison
modes. A similar trend was observed for GPT-5:
most participants agreed with its judgments more
than half of the time, although a larger proportion reported agreement only about half of the
time. In contrast, participants tended to agree
with Prometheus2 less than half of the time in the
single-response mode, but more than half of the
time in the comparison mode. Overall, most participants rated the ease of use of all tabs as very easy
and found the visualizations very informative.

In total, we collected 95 annotations for singletutor responses and 115 for pairwise comparisons.
The analysis of these annotations is provided in
Appendix C.2. We do not present it here because
evaluating tutor performance is not the focus of
this work. Instead, our goal is to demonstrate how
our interactive UI can be used for annotation purposes by collecting data that can later be used to
train evaluation models or align language models.

5 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper introduces the ﬁrst open-access, opensource model for pedagogical quality evaluation
of AI tutor responses, released under an MIT license. It is grounded on pedagogical principles
and presents multiple evaluation choices including our proposed light-weight multi-tasking LoMTL
model. The toolkit is highly customizable, allowing researchers and practitioners to extend it to
diverse educational contexts and dialogues across
domains, and it can be easily set up and run locally.
In addition, we provide an interactive web-based
UI that offers interpretable evaluations of the pedagogical capabilities of state-of-the-art LLMs acting as AI tutors for education stakeholders, policymakers, and non-technical audience.
Future work will extend the toolkit by (1) integrating new user dialogues and LLMs in the frontend module to generate real-time responses and
evaluations; (2) expanding the evaluation dimensions; (3) enabling new data upload option in UI;
and (4) broadening coverage to additional subjects,
grade levels, and languages.

LoMTL assessment
GPT-5 assessment
Prometheus assessment
LoMTL ranking
GPT-5 ranking
Prometeus ranking
0
almost always
about half of the time
almost never

3,5

7

10,5

Limitations

14

more than half of the time
less than half of the time

We acknowledge that our work has several limitations. Below, we summarize the major ones
among them.

Figure 3: Participants’ responses indicating how often they agreed with the models’ judgments in singleresponse and comparison modes.

Domain and grade level: In this work, we focus on the mathematical tasks at the middle-school
7

level. This decision is motivated by the availability
of the data at this level and in this domain, but we
plan to extend our work to other domains and levels as we elaborate in Section 5. Moreover, since
users can run our tool on their own data, new domains and levels can already be integrated on the
user’s side.

uation of such models, we aim to improve their
interpretability, which we hope will help avoid potential future risks associated with a wider adoption of these models in education.
This work uses the MRBench dataset (Maurya et al., 2025), which integrates the MathDial
(Macina et al., 2023a) and Bridge (Wang et al.,
2024a) datasets. In these datasets, the identities of the tutors are not revealed, while the student proﬁles are either synthetically created or
anonymized. As a result, we do not anticipate
any direct ethical risks associated with the datasets
used.

Language: Similarly, our current work focuses
on English only. In the future, we hope to extend
it to other languages, as we specify in Section 5,
while users of our tool can also apply it to data in
other languages with their own evaluation models
and LLMs-as-judges on their side.

Acknowledgments

Educational scenario: Building on previous
work in this domain (Maurya et al., 2025;
Kochmar et al., 2025), we only address student
mistake remediation as an educational scenario.
While this is one of the most salient and challenging scenarios in educational dialogues, we recognize this as one of the limitations of our work and
plan to address it in the future.

We are grateful to the Google Academic Research
Award (GARA) 2024 for supporting this research.

References
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan,
Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany Awadalla,
Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, and 1 others. 2024. Phi-3 technical report:
A highly capable language model locally on your
phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219.

Context length: Similarly, following up on the
previous work, our current evaluation approach is
limited to a single turn in the dialogue. We acknowledge this as a limitation, and believe that future work should extend single-turn approaches to
multiple-turn or full-dialogue ones.

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, and 1 others. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.

Taxonomy: We have built our prototype tool
around a well-established evaluation taxonomy
of Maurya et al. (2025). While using a single
taxonomy is a limitation, our code is open-source
and can be extended to incorporate other data, dialogues, taxonomies, and evaluation models on the
user’s side.

Jiyuan An, Xiang Fu, Bo Liu, Xuquan Zong, Cunliang Kong, Shuliang Liu, Shuo Wang, Zhenghao
Liu, Liner Yang, Hanghang Fan, and Erhong Yang.
2025. BLCU-ICALL at BEA 2025 shared task:
Multi-strategy evaluation of AI tutors. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP
for Building Educational Applications (BEA 2025),
pages 1084–1097, Vienna, Austria. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Models: Finally, via our demo tool, we only
showcase a few LLMs-as-tutors and deploy only
two LLMs-as-judges. Since our code is opensource and extendable, more tutor models and
LLMs-as-judges can be integrated on the user’s
side.

Anthropic. 2024.
The Claude 3 Model Family: Opus, Sonnet, Haiku.
In https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268232499.
Steven Bird. 2006. NLTK: the natural language toolkit.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, pages 69–72.

Ethical Considerations
As this work is exploratory, we do not anticipate any signiﬁcant ethical risks associated with it.
Moreover, one of our main goals in this research
is to raise awareness of the education stakeholders
as well as practitioners interested in the state of
the art in AI in Education and the current capabilities of LLMs-as-tutors. Through transparent eval-

Benjamin Samuel Bloom. 1984. The 2 Sigma Problem: The Search for Methods of Group Instruction
as Effective as One-to-One Tutoring. Educational
Researcher, 13:16 – 4.
Jo Boaler. 2013. Ability and mathematics: The mindset revolution that is reshaping education. Forum.

8

Donald J. Boyd, Pam L. Grossman, Hamilton Lankford,
Susanna Loeb, and James Humphrey Wyckoff. 2008.
Teacher Preparation and Student Achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31:416–
440.

Sal Khan. 2024. Khanmigo.
Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Shayne Longpre,
Bill Yuchen Lin, Jamin Shin, Sean Welleck, Graham
Neubig, Moontae Lee, Kyungjae Lee, and Minjoon
Seo. 2024. Prometheus 2: An Open Source Language Model Specialized in Evaluating Other Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 4334–4353, Miami, Florida, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jonathan P Chang, Caleb Chiam, Liye Fu, Andrew Z Wang, Justine Zhang, and Cristian DanescuNiculescu-Mizil. 2020. Convokit: A toolkit for
the analysis of conversations.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.04246.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, and 1 others. 2024. The LLaMA 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783.

Ekaterina Kochmar, Kaushal Maurya, Kseniia
Petukhova, KV Aditya Srivatsa, Anaïs Tack, and
Justin Vasselli. 2025. Findings of the BEA 2025
shared task on pedagogical ability assessment
of AI-powered tutors.
In Proceedings of the
20th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications (BEA 2025),
pages 1011–1033, Vienna, Austria. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Yuming Fan, Chuangchuang Tan, and Wenyu Song.
2025. BJTU at BEA 2025 shared task: Task-aware
prompt tuning and data augmentation for evaluating
AI math tutors. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational
Applications (BEA 2025), pages 1073–1077, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nataliya Kosmyna, Eugene Hauptmann, Ye Tong Yuan,
Jessica Situ, Xian-Hao Liao, Ashly Vivian Beresnitzky, Iris Braunstein, and Pattie Maes. 2025. Your
brain on chatgpt: Accumulation of cognitive debt
when using an ai assistant for essay writing task.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08872.

Kunal Handa, Margarett Clapper, Jessica Boyle, Rose
Wang, Diyi Yang, David Yeager, and Dorottya Demszky. 2023. “Mistakes Help Us Grow”: Facilitating and Evaluating Growth Mindset Supportive Language in Classrooms. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 8877–8897, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan Chowdhury,
Tanmay Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and
Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023a. MathDial: A Dialogue
Tutoring Dataset with Rich Pedagogical Properties
Grounded in Math Reasoning Problems. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 5602–5621, Singapore.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Baraa Hikal, Mohamed Basem, Islam Oshallah, and
Ali Hamdi. 2025. MSA at BEA 2025 shared task:
Disagreement-aware instruction tuning for multidimensional evaluation of LLMs as math tutors. In
Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on Innovative Use
of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA
2025), pages 1194–1202, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Ido Hakimi, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2025.
MathTutorBench: A benchmark for measuring openended pedagogical capabilities of LLM tutors. In
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
204–221, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna
Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, and
1 others. 2023.
Mistral 7B.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.06825.

Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Lingzhi Wang, Tanmay
Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya
Sachan. 2023b. Opportunities and Challenges in
Neural Dialog Tutoring. In Proceedings of the 17th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2357–
2372, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Irina Jurenka, Markus Kunesch, Kevin R McKee,
Daniel Gillick, Shaojian Zhu, Sara Wiltberger,
Shubham Milind Phal, Katherine Hermann, Daniel
Kasenberg, Avishkar Bhoopchand, and 1 others.
2024. Towards responsible development of generative AI for education: An evaluation-driven approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12687.

Yuren Mao, Yuhang Ge, Yijiang Fan, Wenyi Xu, Yu Mi,
Zhonghao Hu, and Yunjun Gao. 2025. A survey on
lora of large language models. Frontiers of Computer Science, 19(7):197605.

Sean Kelly, Robert Bringe, Esteban Aucejo, and
Jane Cooley Fruehwirth. 2020. Using global observation protocols to inform research on teaching effectiveness and school improvement: Strengths and
emerging limitations. Education Policy Analysis
Archives, 28:62–62.

Kaushal Kumar Maurya, Kv Aditya Srivatsa, Kseniia
Petukhova, and Ekaterina Kochmar. 2025. Unifying AI tutor evaluation: An evaluation taxonomy for
pedagogical ability assessment of LLM-powered AI

9

tutors. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of
the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1234–1251, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Making: A Case Study on Remediating Math Mistakes. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2174–
2199, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Shervin Minaee, Tomas Mikolov, Narjes Nikzad,
Meysam Chenaghlu, Richard Socher, Xavier Amatriain, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. Large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06196.

Rose E Wang, Ana T Ribeiro, Carly D Robinson, Susanna Loeb, and Dorottya Demszky. 2024b. Tutor
CoPilot: A Human-AI Approach for Scaling RealTime Expertise. EdWorkingPaper No. 24-1054. Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexandre Passos, David Cournapeau, Mathieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

T Wolf. 2019. Huggingface’s transformers: State-ofthe-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.03771.
Kwang Suk Yoon, Teresa Duncan, Silvia Wen-Yu Lee,
Beth Scarloss, and Kathy L Shapley. 2007. Reviewing the evidence on how teacher professional development affects student achievement. issues & answers. rel 2007-no. 033. ERIC.

Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin,
Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan
Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, and 1 others. 2024. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across
millions of tokens of context.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.05530.
Jihyeon Roh and Jinhyun Bang. 2025. bea-jh at BEA
2025 shared task: Evaluating AI-powered tutors
through pedagogically-informed reasoning. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on Innovative Use
of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA
2025), pages 1049–1059, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anaïs Tack, Ekaterina Kochmar, Zheng Yuan, Serge
Bibauw, and Chris Piech. 2023. The BEA 2023
shared task on generating AI teacher responses in
educational dialogues. In Proceedings of the 18th
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications (BEA 2023), pages 785–
795, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak,
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard,
Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, and 1 others.
2024. Gemma 2: Improving open language models
at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118.
Rose Wang and Dorottya Demszky. 2024.
EduConvoKit: An Open-Source Library for Education
Conversation Data. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pages 61–69, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rose Wang, Qingyang Zhang, Carly Robinson, Susanna Loeb, and Dorottya Demszky. 2024a. Bridging the Novice-Expert Gap via Models of Decision-

10

A

Pedagogical Dimensions and Data

A.1

Evaluation Dimensions

tors or LLMs) are annotated by human annotators
across four selected dimensions with labels "Yes,"
"To some extent," and "No," as detailed in Table 3.
The proposed LoMTL model is trained on the development set and evaluated on the test set; all results presented in this work are reported on the test
set. We further split the development set into a 9:1
ratio for training and validation when developing
the LoMTL model. All model checkpoints were selected based on validation performance. Finally,
we randomly selected a subset of 10 dialogues
from the test set as a demonstration set, which is
used in the demo app. These details are summarized in Table 4.

Maurya et al. (2025) proposed an evaluation taxonomy with eight dimensions to assess the pedagogical soundness of Tt+1 tutor response in the
context of SMR. These dimensions are grounded
in learning science research and prior work on tutor evaluation, deﬁning the assessment via eight
concrete criteria. Furthermore, the authors validated these dimensions as necessary and sufﬁcient
through a human pilot study. They also released
the associated MRBench dataset with human annotations (see §A.2). Following this, Kochmar et al.
(2025) focused on four key dimensions from this
taxonomy for the BEA shared task, where participating teams were challenged to develop a ternary
classiﬁcation model for each of the four dimensions. These classiﬁers aimed to assess the pedagogical quality of the Tt+1 response on-the-ﬂy,
enabling evaluation scalability with new data and
tutors. Details on each of the four dimensions,
along with their deﬁnitions, annotated labels, and
desiderata, are provided in Table 3. Building on
this, our AITutor-EvalKit toolkit focuses on the
four key dimensions used in the BEA shared task.
A.2

B LoMTL Evaluation Model
B.1 Motivation
Building LoMTL has a two-fold motivation: (1) The
current human annotation-based pedagogical ability assessments presented by Maurya et al. (2025)
are static in nature. They are not scalable to new
LLMs and tutoring systems, which are being developed very frequently nowadays. We need a reliable automated evaluation model that can provide
pedagogical assessment on-the-ﬂy for new tutors
or responses and help track the progress of AI tutor abilities. (2) The BEA shared task (Kochmar
et al., 2025) is a good starting point for developing
an automated evaluation model. More than 50 international teams participated in the challenge and
proposed several novel modeling approaches, including diverse prompting strategies, full instruction tuning, LoRA-based ﬁnetuning, supervised
ﬁnetuning, data augmentation, label balancing, ensembling and so on. However, most teams that
participated in all four tracks did not develop a
uniﬁed approach (with the exception of the MSA
team (Hikal et al., 2025)) and instead used models
with a large number of parameters. This hinders
the adaptability of these approaches, as their deployment becomes challenging and costly.
These limitations motivated us to develop
LoMTL, a lightweight model with only 2
billion parameters, created by training the
google/gemma-2-2b-it model using LoRA
in a multi-task learning setting. It achieves
comparable performance while being signiﬁcantly
more efﬁcient (see Table 5 for comparison).
For instance, the top-performing BJTU team
(Fan et al., 2025) achieved a macro-F1 score of
0.645 using 288 billion parameters (across all

Dataset Details and Statistics

We used the MRBench dataset to develop the toolkit
and the automated evaluation model (i.e., LoMTL).
The initial version of MRBench, released by Maurya et al. (2025), contains 191 dialogues. This was
extended by Kochmar et al. (2025) which results
in 300 dialogues in the development set and 191
dialogues in the test set. In this work, we use the
extended version of the MRBench dataset.
The dataset is built on top of two public datasets
– MathDial (Macina et al., 2023a) and Bridge
(Wang et al., 2024a) – which provide partial conversational histories from secondary and primary
school-level mathematics, respectively, along with
human tutor responses as Tt+1 . MathDial includes only one expert tutor response, whereas
Bridge includes two responses from expert and
novice human tutors. Additionally, each dialogue includes seven Tt+1 responses generated by
seven state-of-the-art LLMs-as-tutors, including
GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini (Reid et al.,
2024), Sonnet (Anthropic, 2024), Mistral (Jiang
et al., 2023), Llama-3.1-8B and Llama-3.1-405B
(Dubey et al., 2024), and Phi3 (Abdin et al., 2024).
All Tt+1 responses (whether from human tu11

Dimension

Deﬁnition

Mistake identiﬁcation

Has the tutor identiﬁed a mistake in a students response?

Mistake location

Does the tutor’s response accurately point to a genuine mistake and its location?

Providing guidance

Does the tutor offer correct and relevant guidance, such as an explanation,
elaboration, hint, examples, and so on?

Actionability

Is it clear from the tutor’s feedback what the student should do next?

Labels
(1) Yes
(2) To some extent
(3) No
(1) Yes
(2) To some extent
(3) No
(1) Yes
(2) To some extent
(3) No
(1) Yes
(2) To some extent
(3) No

Desiderata
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Table 3: An overview of the evaluation taxonomy, associated deﬁnitions, annotation labels, and desired labels from
Maurya et al. (2025).
Parameters
Number of dialogues (Dev / Test / Total)
Number of tutor responses (Dev / Test / Total)
Number of tutors (Total)
Number of human tutors
Number of LLM tutors
LLM tutor models
Source datasets
MathDial
Bridge
Demonstration set size

Value/Details
300 / 191 / 491
2,476 / 1,547 / 4,023
9
2 (1 expert, 1 novice)
7
GPT-4, Gemini, Sonnet, Mistral,
Llama-3.1-8B, Llama-3.1-405B, Phi-3
MathDial, Bridge
Expert human tutor only
Expert and Novice human tutors
10 dialogues (from test set)

Table 4: Key details of the extended MRBench dataset.

four dimensions). In contrast, the LoMTL model
achieved 0.60 with only 2 billion parameters, approximately 0.7% of the BJTU model’s parameter
count.
B.2

explored several approaches such as focal loss, label sampling, loss weighting, and sampling methods. We obtained the best performance with oversampling where we randomly sample underrepresented examples in the training dataset. Model
training and inference were done with a single
48GB A6000 GPU. The best checkpoints were obtained using validation data (10% of the development dataset).

Training and Inference

In this section, we provide details on the training
and evaluation of the LoMTL model. Inspired by the
success of LoRA-based modeling from the BEA
shared task (Kochmar et al., 2025) and by the community (Mao et al., 2025), we adapted a LoRAbased ﬁne-tuning approach. Since we have a small
amount of training data (approximately 2500 examples for each dimension) and the different tasks
are somewhat related, the natural modeling choice
is multi-task learning, where each evaluation dimension is formulated as a task. This LoRA-based
multi-task ﬁne-tuning approach (called LoMTL) resulted in a compact single model and enabled
ﬂexibility in model deployment. Further, we experimented with a small google/gemma-2-2b-it
model, which resulted in fast inference. We observed two major issues during training: task imbalance and label imbalance. To mitigate task
imbalance, we implemented a balance batching
where each batch has an uniform number of examples from each task. For label imbalance, we

B.3 Prompts and Conﬁgurations
Prompt structure and training/evaluation conﬁgurations for the LoMTL model are shown in Figure 4
and Table 6, respectively.

C Toolkit Evaluation Details and Results
C.1 Extended Evaluation Results
In addition to the observations on the accuracy
and macro-F1 scores in Section 4.1, a closer inspection of precision and recall (from Table 7) further supports our ﬁndings. On the full test set,
LoMTL achieves the highest macro-precision (0.63)
while maintaining competitive recall (0.59), indicating more accurate and consistent positive predictions compared to both baselines. GPT-5 attains slightly higher recall (0.60) but with lower
12

Team/Model
BJTU (Fan et al., 2025)
MSA (Hikal et al., 2025)
BLCU-ICALL (An et al., 2025)
bea-jh (Roh and Bang, 2025)
Prometheus2 (Kim et al., 2024)
GPT-5 (Achiam et al., 2023)
LoMTL (ours)

Macro-F1
0.646
0.643
0.632
0.625
0.410
0.581
0.601

# LLMs
4 (Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B)
5 × 4 (mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1)
4 (Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B)
4 (zai-org/glm-4-9b)
4 (prometheus-7b-v2.0)
1 (google/gemma-2-2b-it)

# Parameters
4 × 72B = 288B
20 × 7B = 140B
4 × 7B = 28B
4 × 9B = 36B
4 × 7B = 28B
2B

Parameter Size vs. 2B
144× larger
70× larger
14× larger
18× larger
14× larger
-

Table 5: Comparison of macro-F1 scores and model parameters between our automated evaluation model (i.e.,
LoMTL) and the top-performing teams in the BEA shared task and LLM-as-a-judge models across four dimensions
(aka. tasks). Note that, (1) for a fair comparison, we include only the teams that participated in all four tracks of
the shared task, and (2) since GPT-5 is a closed-source model, its parameter details are not publicly available.
SYSTEM PROMPT
You are an expert evaluator of AI tutors.
For the given ### Task, ### Task Definition, ### Label Definition, ### Conversation History and ###
the pedagogical appropriateness of the Tutor Response.
Output exactly one label without additional text: Yes, "No", or "To some extent".

Tutor Response, assess

TASK DEFINITIONS
Mistake Identification

Has the tutor identified or recognized a mistake in a student’s response?

Mistake Location

Does the tutor’s response accurately pinpoint the location of a genuine mistake?
Does the tutor offer correct and relevant guidance, such as an explanation, elaboration, hint,
examples, and so on?
Is it clear from the tutor’s feedback what the student should do next?

Providing Guidance
Actionability

LABEL DEFINITIONS
Mistake Identification

Yes:
The tutor correctly identified the mistake in the student’s response.
To some extent: The tutor partially recognized the mistake but did not fully capture it.
No:
The tutor failed to identify any mistake.

Mistake Location

Yes:
The tutor accurately points to the exact mistake and its location.
To some extent: The tutor points to a mistake but imprecisely or partially.
No:
The tutor fails to indicate the mistake or its location.

Providing Guidance

Yes:
The tutor provides correct and relevant guidance, hints, examples, or explanation.
To some extent: The guidance is partially correct or not fully helpful.
No:
The tutor fails to provide relevant guidance.

Actionability

Yes:
It is clear what the student should do next.
To some extent: The next steps are somewhat unclear or incomplete.
No:
The feedback does not indicate any actionable steps.

FINAL PROMPT STRUCTURE
content = (
f"{cls.SYSTEM_PROMPT_WITH_LABEL}\n\n"
f"### Task: {task}\n"
f"### Task Definition: {task_def}\n\n"
f"### Label Definition: \n{label_def_str}\n\n"
f"### Conversation History: {conversation.strip()}\n\n"
f"### Tutor Response: {response.strip()}\n\n"
f"Now provide the classification label:"
)

Figure 4: Overview of the prompt components, their associated deﬁnitions and details, and the ﬁnal prompt structure used in LoMTL.

precision (0.58), suggesting a more recall-oriented
behavior. On the demonstration subset, GPT-5
achieves the highest precision (0.60) and recall
(0.61), whereas LoMTL remains competitive (0.58
precision, 0.56 recall) and substantially outperforms Prometheus2. Overall, these results show
that LoMTL maintains a balanced precisionrecall
trade-off, reinforcing its robustness across evaluation dimensions.

C.2 Human Annotation Analysis
We collected 95 annotations for single-tutor responses and 115 for pairwise comparisons. Since
annotators were free to choose any dialogues and
models, the number of annotations per tutor is not
uniform. In pairwise comparisons, Gemini was
selected most frequently – 49 out of 115 comparisons included Gemini as one of the tutors. Other
tutors appeared in 17-36 comparisons, except for
Novice, which was chosen only ﬁve times. Over13

Category
Model
Task Dimensions
Input Length
Prompt
Batching
Batching
Training Schedule
Training Schedule
Training Schedule
Logging
Saving
Evaluation Cycle
Oversampling
Metric for best model
LoRA
LoRA
LoRA
Early Stopping
Early Stopping
Generation

Parameter

Value
Common Settings
MODEL_NAME
google/gemma-2-2b-it
DIMENSIONS
Mistake_Identiﬁcation,
Mistake_Location,
Providing_Guidance, Actionability
MAX_LENGTH
1024
include_label_deﬁnitions
Enabled
Training-Only Settings
BATCH_SIZE
4
GRAD_ACCUM
1
EPOCHS
3
LEARNING_RATE
1e-4
WEIGHT_DECAY
0.1
LOGGING_STEPS
50
SAVE_STEPS
300
EVAL_STEPS
300
OVERSAMPLE_METHOD “random”
METRIC_FOR_BEST
“eval_loss"
LORA_R
8
LORA_ALPHA
16
LORA_DROPOUT
0.1
EARLY_PATIENCE
5
EARLY_THRESHOLD
0.0
Evaluation-Only Settings
TEMPERATURE
1.0

Table 6: Summary of training and evaluation conﬁgurations along with their corresponding parameter names.

all, Expert responses were preferred most often,
winning in 60% of the cases in which the Expert’s
response appeared. Sonnet and Llama-3.1-405B
were also selected more than half of the time.
Novice’s responses never won.
In the single-tutor mode, 37 annotations marked
responses as helpful, 31 as not helpful, and 27 as
to some extent helpful. The most helpful responses
came from Expert, Sonnet, Gemini, and Mistral,
each of which was rated helpful in at least half
of the corresponding cases. The least helpful
responses were from Phi3 and Llama-3.1-8B.
Mistral and Llama-3.1-405B were the only tutors without any not helpful annotations, as they
had the highest proportion of to some extent helpful ratings.

14

Model

LoMTL (ours)
Prometheus2
GPT-5

Full Test Set

Demonstration Set

Accuracy

Macro-F1

Precision

Recall

Accuracy

Macro-F1

Precision

Recall

0.72
0.47
0.66

0.60
0.41
0.58

0.63
0.44
0.58

0.59
0.45
0.60

0.68
0.41
0.66

0.55
0.34
0.59

0.58
0.38
0.60

0.56
0.36
0.61

Table 7: Accuracy, macro-F1, macro-precision and macro-recall scores (averaged across Mistake Identiﬁcation (MI), Mistake Location (ML), Providing Guidance (PG), and Actionability (AC)) for our LoMTL model,
Prometheus2, and GPT-5 on the full test set from Kochmar et al. (2025) and on the demonstration set. Best
results are shown in bold.

Figure 5: Informed consent form that participants were required to accept before proceeding with their feedback
and annotations.

15

C.3

Full Questionnaire

Below are the informed consent forms that participants were required to read and accept, as well as the
full questionnaire.
Background
Item

Question / Response Options

What is your highest qualiﬁcation?

Response options: Bachelor’s degree; Master’s degree; PhD degree;
Other.
Do you have teaching experience (e.g., lecturing, Response options: Yes; No.
supervising or mentoring students, TA-ing, or similar)?
Have you ever used an AI tutor before?
Response options: Yes; No.

Automated Evaluation
Item

Question / Response Options

Instructions

This tab gives you an opportunity to select among 10 short dialogues
on relatively simple (no higher than middle-school level) math problems, check students’ misconceptions, and explore various human and
AI tutor responses. The quality of these responses is evaluated using
a ﬁne-tuned evaluation model.
Steps
1) Explore at least 5 different dialogues (the correct answer is also
available to help you spot the student’s mistake).
2) For each dialogue, check at least 2 different tutor responses.
3) Rate each response as Helpful, Not Helpful, or To some extent.
4) Select at least one quality dimension to view the model’s assessment of that response.
5) For each dialogue, use the comparison mode at least once.
How many dialogues have you checked?
Free-form response.
How often did you agree with this model’s assess- Scale: 1 = almost never, 2 = less than half of the time, 3 = about half
ment for a single tutor response?
of the time, 4 = more than half of the time, 5 = almost always.
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
How often did you agree with this model’s ranking Same scale as above.
of the tutors in the comparison mode?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
On a scale from 1 to 5, how easy was it to use the Scale: 1 = not easy at all, 5 = very easy.
“Automated Evaluation” tab?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Please feel free to give us any further feedback on Free-form response.
this tab.

LLM Evaluation
Item

Question / Response Options

Instructions

This tab provides access to the same dialogues and tutor responses as
in Tab 1, but this time they are evaluated using LLMs as judges. You
can choose between GPT-5 and Prometheus.
Steps
1) Explore at least 5 different dialogues (they may be the same ones
as before).
2) For each dialogue, check at least 2 different tutor responses.
3) Use each LLM-as-judge at least twice on different dialogues.
4) Select at least one quality dimension for each response.
5) For each dialogue, use the comparison mode at least once.
How many dialogues have you checked?
Free-form response.
How often did you agree with GPT-5’s assessment Scale: 1 = almost never, 2 = less than half of the time, 3 = about half
for a single tutor response?
of the time, 4 = more than half of the time, 5 = almost always.

16

Item
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
How often did you agree with GPT-5’s ranking of
the tutors in the comparison mode?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
How often did you agree with Prometheus’ assessment for a single tutor response?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
How often did you agree with Prometheus’ ranking
of the tutors in the comparison mode?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Which evaluation model did you perceive to be
more accurate in its judgments of tutor responses
GPT-5 or the ﬁne-tuned model from Tab 1 (“Automated Evaluation”)?
Which evaluation model did you perceive to be
more accurate in its judgments of tutor responses
Prometheus or the ﬁne-tuned model from Tab 1
(“Automated Evaluation”)?
On a scale from 1 to 5, how easy was it to use the
“LLM Evaluation” tab?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Any other feedback is welcome.

Question / Response Options
Same scale as above.

Same scale as above.

Same scale as above.

Response options: The model from Tab 1; GPT-5; Hard to say: they
perform similarly.

Response options: The model from Tab 1; Prometheus; Hard to say:
they perform similarly.

Scale: 1 = not easy at all, 5 = very easy.

Free-form response.

Visualizer
Item

Question / Response Options

Instructions

This tab visualizes statistics from the full dataset of tutorial dialogues
and annotated tutor responses. The dataset contains 300 dialogues
with responses from 9 tutors (except for the Novice tutor, who has
annotations for 76 dialogues). Participants are asked to explore visualizations for at least 2 tutors.
On a scale from 1 to 5, how informative did you Scale: 1 = not informative at all, 5 = very informative.
ﬁnd these visualizations?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
On a scale from 1 to 5, how easy was it to use the Scale: 1 = not easy at all, 5 = very easy.
“Visualizer” tab?
Response options: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
We welcome any further feedback.
Free-form response.

17

D

User Interface (UI) Details

Figure 6: Overview of the UI and the Automated Evaluation Tab.

18

Figure 7: Interface showcasing the selected problem topic with Context, automated Tutor Response, student feedback options, and ground truth veriﬁcation panel.

Figure 8: UI displaying the enabled Tutor Comparison Mode, allowing users to compare responses from any two
selected tutors for the selected problem topic, along with the Context block, selected tutor responses, feedback
options, and ground truth veriﬁcation option.

19

Figure 9: Displayed Tutor Comparison Visualization Panel showcasing Summary metrics, Spider Chart, Bar Chart,
and Differences views for the chosen evaluation results.

20

Figure 10: Overview of the LLM Evaluation module showcasing the dashboard panel with statistics on topics,
conversations, tutors, and evaluation dimensions. The interface also highlights the provided options for Tutor
Comparison Mode and Judge Comparison Mode for advanced pedagogical assessment.

Figure 11: User Interface displaying the enabled Tutor Comparison Mode within the LLM Evaluation module,
showing the selected problem, tutor responses from two tutors, and the judge LLM for evaluation.

21

Figure 12: Tutor Performance Summary panel in the Visualizer module, displaying the aggregated evaluation
scores for each tutor across all assessment dimensions within the MRBench development dataset.

Figure 13: Interface of the Visualization Controls Panel, showing conﬁgurable options for selecting tutors and
evaluation dimensions to generate comparative spider chart and bar plot visualizations.

22

Figure 14: The spider chart representing tutors performance across selected evaluation dimensions, based on
conﬁgurations chosen in the Visualization Controls Panel.

Figure 15: The bar plot representing tutors performance across selected evaluation dimension, based on conﬁgurations chosen from the Visualization Controls Panel.

23

