Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132
DOI 10.1007/s40593-015-0086-4
A RT I C L E

Conversations with AutoTutor Help Students Learn
Arthur C. Graesser 1

Published online: 19 January 2016
# International Artificial Intelligence in Education Society 2016

Abstract AutoTutor helps students learn by holding a conversation in natural language. AutoTutor is adaptive to the learners’ actions, verbal contributions, and in some
systems their emotions. Many of AutoTutor’s conversation patterns simulate human
tutoring, but other patterns implement ideal pedagogies that open the door to computer
tutors eclipsing human tutors in learning gains. Indeed, current versions of AutoTutor
yield learning gains on par with novice and expert human tutors. This article selectively
highlights the status of AutoTutor’s dialogue moves, learning gains, implementation
challenges, differences between human and ideal tutors, and some of the systems that
evolved from AutoTutor. Current and future AutoTutor projects are investigating threeparty conversations, called trialogues, where two agents (such as a tutor and student)
interact with the human learner.
Keywords AutoTutor . Conversational agents . Trialogues . Intelligent tutoring systems

The Tutorial Dialogue of AutoTutor
This article reflects on a paper published in 2001 on BTeaching Tactics and Dialogue in
AutoTutor^, coauthored by Graesser et al. (2001). AutoTutor is a pedagogical agent that
holds a conversation with students in natural language and simulates the dialogue
moves of human tutors as well as ideal pedagogical strategies (Graesser et al. 2004;
Graesser et al. 2008; see Nye et al. 2014, for an in depth history of 17 years of
AutoTutor). My colleagues and I were inspired by the notion that there is something
about conversation mechanisms in a tutoring session that help people learn (Graesser
et al. 1995). And indeed, untrained tutors do help students learn better than classroom
Submission to Special Issue of International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education on 25th
Anniversary.

* Arthur C. Graesser
graesser@memphis.edu
1

Department of Psychology & Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis, 202
Psychology Building, Memphis, TN 38152-3230, USA

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

125

interactions and various other ecological controls (Graesser et al. 2011). We were also
inspired by the notion that some of the discourse moves of tutors could be improved if
they were guided by ideal pedagogical principles. So a combination of natural discourse interaction and ideal tutor moves would be the magic formula to improve
student learning.
We wrestled with the possibility that ideal computer tutoring moves may be different
sometimes than normal conversational moves of human tutors. For example, our
analyses of human tutors revealed that they are prone to follow principles of conversational politeness so they are reluctant to give negative feedback when a student’s
contribution is incorrect or vague (Graesser et al. 1995; Person et al. 1995). Accurate
feedback sometimes needs to be sacrificed in order to promote confidence and selfefficacy in the student (Lepper and Woolverton 2002). However, many students expect
the computers to be accurate rather than polite. Consequently, there is a trade-off
between feedback accuracy and the promotion of politeness or self-esteem. There also
appeared to be illuminating differences in the pragmatic ground rules of communication with computers versus humans (Person et al. 1995). Given the various trade-offs
and incompatible predictions, we envisioned a program of research to investigate the
impact of specific tutoring strategies and conversation patterns on student learning and
motivation. This program of research continues to evolve among colleagues investigating automated tutorial dialogue both in Memphis (Nye et al. 2014; Rus et al. 2013)
and other labs (e.g., Dzikovska et al. 2014; Johnson and Lester 2015; Ward et al. 2013).
The AutoTutor project was launched in 1997 at a point in history when animated
conversational agents emerged and penetrated learning environments. The agents were
computerized talking heads or embodied animated avatars that generate speech, actions, facial expressions, and gestures. Some of the agents were very rigid and scripted,
whereas AutoTutor attempted to adapt to the knowledge states, verbosity, and the
emotional states of the learner. AutoTutor was indeed successful in tracking the
student’s knowledge states and adaptively generating dialogue moves (Graesser et al.
2004; Jackson and Graesser 2006; Nye et al. 2014; VanLehn et al. 2007). We also
developed an affect-sensitive AutoTutor that responded intelligently to the emotions of
the student, such as confusion, frustration, and boredom (D’Mello and Graesser 2012).
The power of conversational agents is that they can precisely specify what the agent
expresses and does under specific conditions, whereas humans could never exhibit such
precision. Agents can guide the learner on what to do next, deliver didactic instruction,
hold collaborative conversations, and model ideal behavior, strategies, reflections, and
social interactions. Pedagogical agents have become increasingly popular in contemporary adaptive learning environments (DeepTutor, Rus et al. 2013; Betty’s Brain,
Biswas et al. 2010; iSTART, McNamara et al. 2006; Crystal Island, Rowe et al.
2010; Guru Tutor, Olney et al. 2012; Operation ARIES, Millis et al. 2011), just to
name a few systems. These systems have covered topics in STEM (physics, biology,
computer literacy), reading comprehension, scientific reasoning, and other domains and
skills.
AutoTutor and these other systems with pedagogical agents have helped students
learn compared to various control conditions. In the case of AutoTutor, reports covering
multiple studies have reported average learning gains that vary between 0.3 sigma (Nye
et al. 2014) and 0.8 (Graesser et al. 2008) when compared to reading text for an
equivalent amount of time; the effect sizes are substantially higher in comparisons with

126

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

pre-tests and no-study controls (Graesser et al. 2004; VanLehn et al. 2007). Human
tutors have not differed greatly from AutoTutor and other ITS’s with natural language
interaction in experiments that provide direct comparisons with trained human tutors
(Olney et al. 2012; VanLehn 2011; VanLehn et al. 2007). For example, in a direct
comparison between AutoTutor and 1-to-1 human tutoring with experienced tutors in
computer-mediated conversations (either typed or spoken), the learning gains were
virtually equivalent on the topic of Newtonian physics (VanLehn et al. 2007). Given
these encouraging results from human and computer tutoring, we investigated what it is
about conversation that helps student learning and motivation.

Conversation Patterns in AutoTutor and Human Tutors
We conducted a series of experiments that attempted to identify the features of
AutoTutor that might account for improvements in learning (Graesser et al. 2004,
2008; Kopp et al. 2012; VanLehn et al. 2007). It is beyond the scope of this article to
cover all of these features, but a few are particularly noteworthy. One noteworthy finding
is that it is not the talking head that accounts for most of the improvement, but rather the
content of what the agent says and the student says. The talking head has only a small
advantage over the agent’s conveying its dialogue moves in print or spoken modalities.
Learning from AutoTutor is not appreciably different from conditions where the learner
is guided to read small snippets of text or summaries of a solution at opportunistic points
in time. From the standpoint of student input modality, learning is no different when
students express their contributions in speech or keyboard (D’Mello et al. 2011). Simply
put, it is the content that matters: What gets expressed at the right time in a conversation?
Another noteworthy conclusion is that we were impressed with the robustness of the
core conversation mechanisms in both AutoTutor and most human tutoring. As mentioned
earlier, many of the core conversation mechanisms in AutoTutor are similar to human
tutoring. We documented major conversation mechanisms of human tutors who tutored
middle school children in mathematics and college students in research methods. The
detailed anatomy of human tutoring was based on near 100 tutoring sessions that were
videotaped, transcribed, and analyzed in depth (Graesser et al. 1997; Graesser and Person
1994; Graesser et al. 1995; Person et al. 1994; Person et al. 1995). In particular, one
discourse mechanism in both AutoTutor and human tutoring is called expectation &
misconception-tailored dialogue (EMT dialogue). The human tutors anticipate particular
correct answers (called expectations) and particular misunderstandings (misconceptions)
when they ask the students challenging questions (or problems) and track the students’
answers. As the students express their answers, which are distributed over multiple
conversational turns, their contributions are compared with expectations and misconceptions through semantic pattern matching. The tutors give feedback to the students’ answers
with respect to matching the expectations or misconceptions. Some feedback is short,
consisting of positive, neutral, or negative expressions either in words, intonation, or facial
expressions. After the short feedback, the tutor tries to lead the student to express the
expectations (good answers) through multiple dialogue moves, such as pumps (BWhat
else^), hints, or prompts to get the students to express specific words. When the student
fails to answer the question correctly, the tutor contributes information as assertions. The
pump-hint-prompt-assertion cycles are implemented in AutoTutor (and are frequent in

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

127

human tutoring, Graesser et al. 1995) to extract or cover particular sentence-like expectations. Eventually, all of the expectations are covered and the exchange is finished for the
main question or problem.
It is feasible to implement EMT dialogue computationally because it relies on
semantic pattern matching and attempts to achieve pattern completion (through hints
and prompts). This is a simpler mechanism than interpreting natural language from
scratch, which is beyond the boundaries of reliable natural language processing. EMT
dialogue is not only frequent in human tutoring but creates reasonably smooth conversations in AutoTutor and helps students learn. Interestingly, human tutors rarely use
sophisticated tutoring strategies that are difficult to implement on computer, such as
bona fide Socratic tutoring, modeling-scaffolding-fading, building on prerequisites, and
dialogue moves that scaffold metacognitive strategies (Cade et al. 2008; Graesser et al.
1995). Automated computer tutors will possibly show major advantages over human
tutors when the systems can reliably implement these more sophisticated strategies.
AutoTutor successfully implemented nearly all of the conversational mechanisms of
human tutors, but one notable exception is that it could not handle most of the student
questions. Student questions are infrequent in most classroom and tutoring environments because the teacher or tutor tends to control the agenda (Graesser et al. 1995).
However, when students do ask questions, the relevance and correctness of the answers
is disappointing in AutoTutor, as it is in other automated environments. We have had to
implement diversionary tactics to handle the students questions, such as BHow would
you answer that question?^ or BAutoTutor cannot answer that question now.^ As a
consequence, the frequency of student questions unfortunately extinguishes quickly in
tutoring sessions with AutoTutor (Graesser and McNamara 2010).
We continued to question the use of human tutors, even expert tutors, as the gold standard
in the design of AutoTutor. We identified a number of blind spots and questionable tactics of
human tutors (Graesser et al. 2011) that could potentially be improved by incorporating ideal
tutoring strategies. For example, tutors are prone to give a summary recap of a solution to a
problem, or answer to a difficult question, that required many conversational turns. It would
be better to sometimes have the student give the summary recap in order to promote active
student learning, to encourage the student to practice articulating the information, or to allow
the tutor to diagnose remaining deficits. As another example, tutors often assume that the
student understands what the tutor expresses in an exchange whereas students often do not
understand, even partially. Indeed, there often is a large gulf between the knowledge of the
student and that of the tutor. It sometimes would be better for the tutor to ask follow up
questions to verify the extent to which the student understands what the tutor is attempting to
communicate. Ideal tutoring strategies are needed to augment or replace some of the typical
conversation patterns in human tutoring.
One of the pervasive challenges throughout the development of AutoTutor and
subsequent learning environments has been optimizing the semantic match scores
between the students’ verbal contributions and AutoTutor’s anticipated answers (both
the expectations and misconceptions). The student’s contributions over dozens of
conversational turns in a single dialogue are constantly compared semantically with
the set of expectations and misconceptions. There is a speech act classifier that
segments the student’s verbal input within a turn into speech acts and assigns each
speech act to a category, such question, statement, meta-cognitive expression (e.g., BI
do not know^) or short response, as designated in the Dialogue Advancer Network

128

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

(Graesser et al. 2001). The statements are the only speech acts that are compared with
the expectations and misconceptions through semantic matching algorithms. An expectation (or misconception) is considered covered if it meets or exceeds some
threshold parameter for matching.
We have evaluated many semantic matchers over the years. The best results are a
combination of latent semantic analysis (LSA) (Landauer et al. 2007), frequency
weighted word overlap (rarer words and negations have higher weight), and
regular expressions. In fact, LSA plus regular expressions have had high
reliability scores in comparisons with human experts versus pairs of human
experts (Cai et al. 2011). Interestingly, syntactic computations did not prove
useful in these analyses because a high percentage of the students’ contributions
are telegraphic, elliptical, and ungrammatical. Researchers who have developed
tutorial dialogue systems with deep syntactic parsers (e.g., BEETLE II,
Dzikovska et al. 2014) routinely point out the limitations of syntactic parsers
when there are low quality language contributions of students.
We learned, after many years, that a semantic match algorithm with impressive
fidelity will not necessarily go the distance in meeting the students’ wishes. There are
two problems that continue to haunt us. The first problem addresses the students’
standards on what it means to cover a sentence-like answer correctly. If a good answer
has four content words (A, B, C, D) that ideally are expressed, the students want full
credit if they can express only one or two of the distinctive words (e.g., A and B). They
get frustrated when their partial answers only get neutral or negative feedback from the
tutor; students think they have covered the sentence answer but AutoTutor does not
score it as covered unless the students express the remaining words (C and D). The
students assume that the assumed shared knowledge should be sufficient to fill in the
remaining words, but AutoTutor wants to see a more complete answer articulated. The
second problem addresses the semantic blur that invariably occurs between expectations and misconceptions when the algorithms rely on statistical algorithms like LSA,
word overlap and regular expressions. Students may get negative feedback
when their statements match a misconception more than an expectation; or
positive feedback when they express something erroneous. This semantic blur
produces inaccurate feedback which can end up confusing or frustrating the
student. Although we do everything we can to engineer the content and
threshold parameters, these errors still occasionally occur because of the vagueness of language. One practical solution to this challenge is to have AutoTutor
give neutral short feedback after these uncertain or borderline semantic matches
so that the student is not misled or frustrated when the semantic matches are
imperfect. Another approach is to provide more discriminating hints and
prompts when there is a semantic blur between expectations and misconceptions. The hints and prompts would more cleanly differentiate a correct expectation versus a misconception.

Future AutoTutor Directions and Trialogues
Many spinoffs from AutoTutor have been developed after its inception in 1997 and the
publication of Graesser et al. (2001). Nye et al. (2014) reported that dozens of systems

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

129

have evolved from AutoTutor in the Institute for Intelligent Systems at the University
of Memphis. These systems have covered many STEM topics, reading comprehension, writing, and scientific reasoning, with names like DeepTutor, GuruTutor,
GnuTutor, AutoMentor, iDRIVE, iSTART, Writing-Pal, Operation ARIES (and
ARA). A recent system has integrated AutoTutor with ALEKS in mathematics,
a system commercialized by McGraw-Hill that has helped middle school students in the Memphis area (Hu et al. 2012). The Memphis team has recently
started developing AutoTutor for basic electronics and electricity in an
ElectronxTutor that is funded by Office of Naval Research. The suite of
AutoTutor applications is starting to cover a large curriculum landscape.
Researchers at other universities, businesses, and organizations are increasingly
licensing the AutoTutor Script Authoring Tool (Cai et al. 2015) to develop their
own content and integrate it with our generic AutoTutor Conversation Engine
(ACE). For example, Wolfe et al. (2015) used the AutoTutor authoring tools to
develop a website on genetic risk factors for breast cancer, called BRCA, and
reported learning gains above the existing web site on the same topic.
Educational Testing Service is licensing ASAT for assessment on a variety of
competencies (English Language Learning, science, mathematics) in the context
of virtual worlds with agents (Zapata-Rivera et al. 2015). The Army Research
Laboratory has incorporated AutoTutor in its open source Generalized
Intelligent Framework for Tutoring (GIFT, Sottilare et al. 2013). AutoTutor is
growing further as it migrates to new systems with new names and
applications.
In recent years we have developed trialogues, which involve the human
interacting with two agents, typically a student agent and a tutor agent in 3party conversations (Graesser et al. 2014; Graesser et al. 2015a, b; Millis et al.
2011). Two agents add considerable benefits theoretically because the two
agents can model successful conversational interactions, such as asking good
questions and receiving good answers (Gholson et al., 2009) or staging arguments that create cognitive disequilibrium, productive confusion, and deeper
learning (D’Mello et al. 2014; Lehman et al. 2013). The trialogues can help
rectify some of the problems previously discussed on AutoTutor dialogues. For
example, when the human’s answer is incomplete, the student agent can fill in
the missing words and articulate a more complete answer; this not only models
good answers but also circumvents any negative short feedback to the human.
Graesser et al. (2015b) identified seven trialogue designs that can be used in learning
environments. The two agents in each design can take on different roles, but typically
one is a tutor and the other a student peer.
(1) Vicarious learning with human observer. Two agents interact and model ideal
behavior, answers to questions, or reasoning.
(2) Vicarious learning with limited human participation. The same as #1 except that
the agents occasionally turn to the human and ask a prompt question, with a yes/
no or single-word answer.
(3) Tutor agent interacting with human and student agent. There is a tutorial dialogue
with the human, but the student agent periodically contributes and receives
feedback.

130

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

(4) Expert agent staging a competition between the human and a peer agent. There is
a competitive game between the human and peer agent, with the expert agent
organizing the event.
(5) Human teaches/helps a student agent with facilitation from the tutor agent. As the
human tries to help the peer agent, the tutor agent rescues a problematic situation.
(6) Human interacts with two peer agents that vary in proficiency. The peer agents
can vary in knowledge and skills.
(7) Human interacts with two agents expressing contradictions, arguments, or different views. The discrepancies between agents stimulate cognitive disagreement,
confusion, and potentially deeper learning.
Our current hypothesis is that these seven trialogue designs should be adaptively
administered, depending on the student’s knowledge and other psychological attributes.
The vicarious learning designs (1 and 2) are appropriate for learners with limited
knowledge, skills, and actions, whereas designs 5 and 7 are suited to the more capable
students attempting to achieve deeper knowledge. Design 4 is motivating for learners by
virtue of the game competition. Research needs to be conducted to assess empirically the
conditions under which different trialogue designs facilitate learning and motivation.
Trialogues have been routinely incorporated in our recent AutoTutor applications.
Scientific reasoning is the focus in an instructional game called Operation ARIES!
(Millis et al. 2011), which was subsequently commercialized by Pearson Education as
Operation ARA (Halpern et al. 2012). ARIES is an acronym for Acquiring Research
Investigative and Evaluative Skills whereas ARA is an acronym for Acquiring
Research Acumen. Agent trialogues are currently being developed in computer interventions to train comprehension strategies for adults with reading difficulties in the
Center for the Study of Adult Literacy (CSAL, http://csal.gsu.edu/content/homepage).
Interestingly, some trialogue designs have always been used in McNamara’s iSTART
trainer for reading comprehension (McNamara et al. 2006). ETS is currently using
trialogues for assessment and is licensing our ASAT and ACE facilities for that purpose
(Zapata-Rivera et al. 2015).
It is of course possible to build systems with more than two agents and more than
one human. One can imagine communities of humans and cyber agents interacting in
varying numbers. The cyber agents will need conversation mechanisms that are
adaptive and flexible in a similar vein as AutoTutor dialogues and trialogues. At that
point we enter the arenas of collaborative problem solving (Fiore et al. 2010; Graesser
et al. 2015a) and computer supported collaborative learning (Dillenbourg 1999; Rosé
et al., 2008). These are two areas on our horizon during the next decade.
Acknowledgments This research was supported by the National Science Foundation (SBR 9720314, REC
0106965, REC 0126265, ITR 0325428, REESE 0633918, ALT-0834847, DRK-12-0918409, 1108845), the
Institute of Education Sciences (R305H050169, R305B070349, R305A080589, R305A080594,
R305G020018, R305C120001), Army Research Lab (W911INF-12-2-0030), and the Office of Naval Research (N00014-00-1-0600, N00014-12-C-0643). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF, IES, or
DoD. The Tutoring Research Group (TRG) is an interdisciplinary research team comprised of researchers
from psychology, computer science, physics, and education at University of Memphis (visit http://www.
autotutor.org, http://emotion.autotutor.org, http://fedex.memphis.edu/iis/ ). Requests for reprints should be sent
to Art Graesser, Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Building, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN
38152-3230, graesser@memphis.edu.

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

131

References
Biswas, G., Jeong, H., Kinnebrew, J., Sulcer, B., & Roscoe, R. (2010). Measuring self-regulated learning skills
through social interactions in a teachable agent environment. Research and Practice in TechnologyEnhanced Learning, 5, 123–152.
Cade, W., Copeland, J., Person, N., & D’Mello, S. K. (2008). Dialogue modes in expert tutoring. In B. Woolf,
E. Aimeur, R. Nkambou, & S. Lajoie (Eds.), Proceedings of the ninth international conference on
intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 470–479). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Cai, Z., Graesser, A. C., Forsyth, C., Burkett, C., Millis, K., Wallace, P., et al. (2011). Trialog in ARIES: user
input assessment in an intelligent tutoring system. In W. Chen, & S. Li (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd
IEEE international conference on intelligent computing and intelligent systems (pp. 429–433).
Guangzhou: IEEE Press.
Cai, Z., Graesser, A. C., & Hu, X. (2015). ASAT: AutoTutor script authoring tool. In R. Sottilare, A. C.
Graesser, X. Hu, & K. W. Brawner (Eds.), Design recommendations for intelligent tutoring systems:
authoring tools (vol. 3, ). Orlando, FL: Army Research Laboratory.
D’Mello, S. K., & Graesser, A. C. (2012). AutoTutor and affective AutoTutor: learning by talking with
cognitively and emotionally intelligent computers that talk back. ACM Transactions on Interactive
Intelligent Systems, 2, 1–39.
D’Mello, S., Dowell, N., & Graesser, A. C. (2011). Does it really matter whether students’ contributions are
spoken versus typed in an intelligent tutoring system with natural language? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 17, 1–17.
D’Mello, S., Lehman, B., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. C. (2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning.
Learning and Instruction., 29, 153–170.
Dillenbourg, P. (1999). Collaborative learning: cognitive and computational approaches. Advances in
learning and instruction series. New York, NY: Elsevier Science INC..
Dzikovska, M., Steinhauser, N., Farrow, E., Moore, J., & Campbell, G. (2014). BEETLE II: deep natural
language understanding and automatic feedback generation for intelligent tutoring in basic electricity and
electronics. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 24, 284–332.
Fiore, S. M., Rosen, M. A., Smith-Jentsch, K. A., Salas, E., Letsky, M., & Warner, N. (2010). Toward an
understanding of macrocognition in teams: predicting processes in complex collaborative contexts.
Human Factors, 52, 203–224.
Gholson, B., Witherspoon, A., Morgan, B., Brittingham, J. K., Coles, R., Graesser, A. C., et al. (2009).
Exploring the deep-level reasoning questions effect during vicarious learning among eighth to eleventh
graders in the domains of computer literacy and Newtonian physics. Instructional Science, 37, 487–493.
Graesser, A. C., & McNamara, D. S. (2010). Self-regulated learning in learning environments with pedagogical agents that interact in natural language. Educational Psychologist, 45, 234–244.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational Research
Journal, 31, 104–137.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. (1995). Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-toone tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 495–522.
Graesser, A. C., Bowers, C. A., Hacker, D. J., & Person, N. K. (1997). An anatomy of naturalistic tutoring. In
K. Hogan, & M. Pressley (Eds.), Scaffolding student learning: instructional approaches and issues (pp.
145–184). Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books.
Graesser, A. C., Person, N., Harter, D., & the Tutoring Research Group (2001). Teaching tactics and dialog in
AutoTutor. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 12, 257–279.
Graesser, A. C., Lu, S., Jackson, G. T., Mitchell, H., Ventura, M., Olney, A., et al. (2004). AutoTutor: a tutor with
dialogue in natural language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 36, 180–193.
Graesser, A. C., Jeon, M., & Dufty, D. (2008). Agent technologies designed to facilitate interactive knowledge
construction. Discourse Processes, 45, 298–322.
Graesser, A. C., D’Mello, S. K., & Cade, W. (2011). Instruction based on tutoring. In R. E. Mayer, & P. A.
Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of research on learning and instruction (pp. 408–426). New York:
Routledge Press.
Graesser, A. C., Li, H., & Forsyth, C. (2014). Learning by communicating in natural language with
conversational agents. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 274–280.
Graesser, A. C., Foltz, P. W., Rosen, Y., Shaffer, D. W., Forsyth, C., & Germany, M. (2015a). Challenges of
assessing collaborative problem solving. In E. Care, P. Griffin, & M. Wilson (Eds.), Assessment and
teaching of 21st century skills. Berlin: Springer Publishers (in press).

132

Int J Artif Intell Educ (2016) 26:124–132

Graesser, A.C., Forsyth, C., & Lehman, B. (2015b). Two heads may be better than one: learning from
computer agents in conversational trialogues. Teachers College Record (in press).
Halpern, D. F., Millis, K., Graesser, A. C., Butler, H., Forsyth, C., & Cai, Z. (2012). Operation ARA: a
computerized learning game that teaches critical thinking and scientific reasoning. Thinking Skills and
Creativity, 7, 93–100.
Hu, X., Craig, S. D., Bargagliotti, A. E., Graesser, A. C., Okwumabua, T., Anderson, C., et al. (2012). The
effects of a traditional and technology-based after-school program on 6th grade students’ mathematics
skills. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 31, 17–38.
Jackson, G. T., & Graesser, A. C. (2006). Applications of human tutorial dialog in AutoTutor: an intelligent
tutoring system. Revista Signos, 39, 31–48.
Johnson, W.L. & Lester, J.C. (2015). Twenty years of face-to-face interaction with pedagogical agents.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (in press).
Kopp, K., Britt, A., Millis, K., & Graesser, A. (2012). Improving the efficiency of dialogue in tutoring.
Learning and Instruction, 22, 320–330.
Landauer, T., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W. (Eds.) (2007). Handbook of latent semantic
analysis. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lehman, B., D’Mello, S. K., Strain, A., Mills, C., Gross, M., Dobbins, A., et al. (2013). Inducing and tracking
confusion with contradictions during complex learning. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 22, 85–105.
Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2002). The wisdom of practice: lessons learned from the study of highly
effective tutors. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: impact of psychological factors
on education (pp. 135–158). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
McNamara, D. S., O'Reilly, T., Best, R., & Ozuru, Y. (2006). Improving adolescent students’ reading
comprehension with iSTART. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 34, 147–171.
Millis, K., Forsyth, C., Butler, H., Wallace, P., Graesser, A., & Halpern, D. (2011). Operation ARIES! A
serious game for teaching scientific inquiry. In M. Ma, A. Oikonomou, & J. Lakhmi (Eds.), Serious
games and edutainment applications (pp. 169–196). London, UK: Springer-Verlag.
Nye, B. D., Graesser, A. C., & Hu, X. (2014). AutoTutor and family: a review of 17 years of natural language
tutoring. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 24, 427–469.
Olney, A., D’Mello, S. K., Person, N., Cade, W., Hays, P., Williams, C., et al. (2012). Guru: a computer tutor
that models expert human tutors. In S. Cerri, W. Clancey, G. Papadourakis, & K. Panourgia (Eds.),
Proceedings of intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) 2012 (pp. 256–261). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Person, N. K., Graesser, A. C., Magliano, J. P., & Kreuz, R. J. (1994). Inferring what the student knows in one-toone tutoring: the role of student questions and answers. Learning and Individual Differences, 6, 205–229.
Person, N. K., Kreuz, R. J., Zwaan, R., & Graesser, A. C. (1995). Pragmatics and pedagogy: conversational
rules and politeness strategies may inhibit effective tutoring. Cognition and Instruction, 13, 161–188.
Rosé, C., Wang, Y. C., Cui, Y., Arguello, J., Stegmann, K., Weinberger, A., et al. (2008). Analyzing collaborative
learning processes automatically: exploiting the advances of computational linguistics in computer-supported
collaborative learning. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 3, 237–271.
Rowe, J., Shores, L. R., Mott, B., & Lester, J. (2010). Integrating learning, problem solving, and engagement
in narrative-centered learning environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
19, 166–177.
Rus, V., D’Mello, S., Hu, X., & Graesser, A. C. (2013). Recent advances in intelligent systems with
conversational dialogue. AI Magazine, 34, 42–54.
Sottilare, R., Graesser, A., Hu, X., & Holden, H. (Eds.) (2013). Design recommendations for intelligent
tutoring systems: learner modeling (vol. 1, ). Orlando, FL: Army Research Laboratory.
VanLehn, K. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems and other
tutoring systems. Educational Psychologist, 46, 197–221.
VanLehn, K., Graesser, A. C., Jackson, G. T., Jordan, P., Olney, A., & Rose, C. P. (2007). When are tutorial
dialogues more effective than reading? Cognitive Science, 31, 3–62.
Ward, W., Cole, R., Bolaños, D., Buchenroth-Martin, C., Svirsky, E., & Weston, T. (2013). My science tutor: a
conversational multimedia virtual tutor. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 1115–1125.
Wolfe, C. R., Reyna, V. F., Widmer, C. L., Cedillos, E. M., Fisher, C. R., Brust-Renck, P. G., & Weil, A. M.
(2015). Efficacy of a web-based intelligent tutoring system for communicating genetic risk of breast
cancer: a fuzzy-trace theory approach. Medical Decision Making, 35, 46–59.
Zapata-Rivera, D., Jackson, T., & Katz, I.R. (2015). Authoring conversation-based assessment scenarios. In R.
Sottilare, A.C. Graesser, X. Hu, & K.W. Brawner (Eds.), Design Recommendations for Intelligent
Tutoring Systems: Authoring Tools (Vol.3). Orlando, FL: Army Research Laboratory.

