2025 34th IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) | 979-8-3315-8771-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/RO-MAN63969.2025.11217866

2025 34th IEEE International Conference on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN)
August 25-29, 2025. Eindhoven, The Netherlands

A Review of Personalisation in Human-Robot Collaboration and Future
Perspectives Towards Industry 5.0
James Fant-Male1 and Roel Pieters1
while maintaining or improving productivity [6], [7]. Along
with this, the development of HRC in factories presents a key
opportunity to include a wider variety of people within the
workplace [8], [9]. This includes the elderly, people with
disabilities, and those who may not be disabled but have
injury or impairments inhibiting work. Including a wider
variety of people in the workforce has various benefits for
individuals as well as businesses [10].
This review surveys the current state of the art related
to personalisation of HRC in manufacturing. Various key
avenues of research have been pursued in isolation, however
there lacks an overarching consensus and discussion around
what personalised HRC in manufacturing should entail. It
is hoped that this work will bring to light this key aspect
of I5.0 and lead to greater discussion and consolidation of
efforts to create a unified approach. Various recent surveys
have investigated aspects of HRC, however none with the
same focus on personalisation considering the I5.0 paradigm.
Key related reviews are highlighted in Table I.
The remainder of this review is structured as follows. Section II presents the search methodology and overall research
trends. Section III gives an overview of human factors used
for personalised HRC and Human Digital Twins (HDT).
Section IV discusses the design of HRC user interfaces.
Section V investigates user-robot dynamics in collaborative
task completion. Section VI presents regulatory and ethical
considerations. Section VII gives a discussion on future developments and Section VIII presents final conclusions.

Abstract— The shift in research focus from Industry 4.0 (I4.0)
to Industry 5.0 (I5.0) promises a human-centric workplace,
with social and well-being values at the centre of technological
implementation. Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) is a core
aspect of I5.0 development, with an increase in adaptive and
personalised interactions and behaviours. This review investigates recent advancements towards personalised HRC, where
user-centric adaptation is key. There is a growing trend for
adaptable HRC research, however there lacks a consistent and
unified approach. The review highlights key research trends on
which personal factors are considered, the design of humanrobot interaction, and adaptive task completion. This raises
various key considerations for future developments, particularly
around the ethical and regulatory development of personalised
systems, which are discussed in detail.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Significant research has been done into Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) for manufacturing. This has been fuelled
by the pursuit of Industry 4.0 (I4.0), incorporating advanced
technologies such as robotics, cloud computing, and big
data [1]. The proposal of Industry 5.0 (I5.0) by the European
Commission in 2021 presents a future vision for industry in
Europe [2]. The key shift is from a technology-driven to
a value-driven focus [1], with three core values of humancentricity, sustainability and resilience [1], [2].
The I5.0 paradigm focuses on how technology can be
developed and implemented in a way that promotes social
values, well-being and human-centricity [1], [3]. It is therefore important to review current advances in HRC through
the lens of the human-centred I5.0 paradigm. Given the key
focus of human-centricity for I5.0, there has been a lack of
broad discussion around the personalisation and adaptation
of HRC to create user-centric interactions. This is key given
human-centred research has been identified as essential to
the continued sustainability of HRC [4].
Various research investigates human-centric HRC, where
the design and implementation of HRC focuses on the
requirements of generic humans. However, there is a greater
need to focus on user-centered HRC, where interactions are
adjusted to specific users, not generic people. The difference between human-aware and user-aware systems, and its
importance given the highly variable nature of the human
workforce has been discussed previously [5], and is highly
linked to the “one-of-a-kind operator” concept [2].
Increasing consideration for human factors in HRC can
improve the physical and mental well-being of workers,

II. M ETHODOLOGY AND OVERALL T RENDS
The review is conducted following a search of key literature databases, namely Web of Science, Scopus and IEEE
eXplore. The search term is designed to encompass relevant
works on HRC in industry with a personalised or adaptive
nature. Only peer-reviewed conference and journal papers are
considered, which must be available in English and published
TABLE I
R ELATED REVIEW PAPERS ON HRC.

1 Cognitive Robotics group, Unit of Automation Technology and Mechanical Engineering, Tampere University, 33720, Tampere, Finland;

firstname.surname@tuni.fi
979-8-3315-8771-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE

Ref.

Year

Review Focus

[3]
[4]
[7]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

2025
2022
2023
2024
2024
2025
2023
2025
2024

HRC in I5.0 and future prospects.
Review of HRC workspace design.
Trends of human factors and cobots in manufacturing.
Disabled worker assistive technology lack of validation.
Human factor analysis across HRC.
Trustworthy AI for human-centric smart manufacturing.
Personalisation factors for HRI review.
Human Digital Twins in I5.0.
Collaborative intelligence for safety in industry.

223

Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2.

Analysis of publication count by year.

TABLE II
P UBLICATION COUNT BY COUNTRY.

Fig. 1.

PRISMA Flow Diagram of Review Process.

since 2018. The search is performed on 17th January 2025
across titles, abstracts and keywords using the search term:
(human-robot collaboration OR HRC) AND (manufacturing OR industry OR workplace) AND (personal* OR custom*
OR adapt* OR user-centric OR human-centric)
The PRISMA analysis framework is followed using Covidence software, illustrated in Fig. 1. The initial search yielded
1508 results, with an additional 78 included through snowballing and additional searching. 544 duplicates are removed,
4 merged as the same study and 828 removed as irrelevant
during title and abstract screening. 200 are accessible and
go through full-text review of which 120 are excluded. The
primary reasons for exclusion are: not having a personalised
focus/adapting to generic humans; review papers; purely
theoretical focus. As this review is interested in high-level
behaviour adaptation, works focussing on low-level control
aspects such as adaptive compliance control, adaptive ergonomic handover positioning or collision avoidance are
excluded. After all exclusions 80 works1 are considered in
the subsequent analysis.
Analysis of the research output by year is shown in Fig. 2.
The increase year-on-year is evident, with a particular jump
since 2021. This may be attributed to the EU’s shift in focus
towards user-centric workplaces in line with the 2021 I5.0
proposals [2], and verifies the need for a review of this growing research area. The locations of contributing institutions
illustrated in Table II highlights significant research outputs
in Europe, particularly Italy, the UK and Germany.
Articles are categorised according to manually identified
focus areas on how HRC is personalised. Representative
works from each category are highlighted in Table III. Subsequent grouping identified four overarching themes, shown in
Fig. 3. These themes have been used to structure this review,
with Adaptive Interaction and Task Completion discussed in
Sections IV and V respectively. Studies in the remaining
themes are best compared in relation to the range of human
factors used for personalisation, discussed in Section III.

Country

Count

Country

Count

Country

Count

Italy
Germany
UK
US
China
Denmark
Netherlands
Greece
New Zealand

27
16
13
12
5
4
4
3
3

India
Spain
Sweden
Portugal
Finland
France
Slovenia
South Africa
Austria

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1

South Korea
Belgium
Columbia
Mexico
Switzerland
Cyprus
Israel
Luxembourg
Singapore

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

III. VARIABILITY IN H UMAN FACTORS OF W ORKERS
The awareness of a diverse workforce is at the core of
reframing “human-centric” design as “user-centric” design.
Different users must interact with robotic systems and will
have different physical and mental attributes. The desire to
create work environments sympathetic to user variability and
inclusion is well documented within the I5.0 paradigm [1],
[2]. Understanding the different human factors that influence
interactions between the user and the robot is necessary to
properly implement personalised HRC experiences.
Literature analysis of the different personal factors used
to customise HRC is shown in Fig. 4. A large proportion of
works focus on adaptation based on a user’s performance,
such as their speed/experience, or their fatigue level. This
coincides with the large proportion of works investigating
task allocation and coordination, where the performance of
a worker is used to inform how to optimise resources. User
preference is a further key area of research, often aligned
with task order preference, interface design or communication modality selection.
Human factor variation can occur between users (interuser variation) and over time for a specific user (intra-user
variation). Although the distinction between the two is not
always clear, it presents a useful framework under which to

Fig. 3. Article research focus areas (Articles may fit in multiple categories).

1 Available at: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14930099

224
Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III
R EPRESENTATIVE PAPERS OF THE RESEARCH FOCUS AREAS IDENTIFIED .
Ref.

Focus Area

Summary

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[6]

Interviews/analysis of needs
Recognition/monitoring only
Workplace design
User Interface design/method
Robot motion adaptation
Task order learning
Task timing/coordination
Task allocation - online
Task allocation - offline

Mixed-methods analysis of requirements for adaptive automation assembly.
Method for online monitoring of cognitive load under different robot collaboration scenarios.
Method for selection of HRC interface technology based on needs of physically challenged user.
User profile enables custom information display and features on tablet, AR and watch interfaces.
Adjust velocity, separation distance and proximity to user based on user’s preference to promote trust.
Robot dynamically learns human preference for task order and adapts action order accordingly.
Adapt robot task timing based on user proficiency to help balance assembly line.
Dynamic task allocation between user and robot considering energy expenditure of user and makespan.
Task allocation with optimisation for makespan, operator’s energy expenditure and average mental workload.

Fig. 4.

groups [13]. There is therefore a need to investigate this
further in industrial HRC settings.
Differences in perceptions of the benefits of HRC assistance by gender were investigated for a collaborative
polishing task where high and low automation options were
available. Males did not perceive high automation to provide
a benefit while females did perceive a performance benefit [28]. The gender of workers has also been considered
for assembly line balancing, considering an individual’s
comfortable working time [29] and ergonomics [30].
2) Physical Factors: Physical factors include a wide
range of considerations. For example, height and weight,
sensory dis/abilities such as hearing, sight, touch, and motor
dis/abilities such as dexterity and mobility considerations. In
I5.0, there is the potential to revolutionise the accessibility
of jobs for those with physical impairment by integrating
advanced interfaces such as generative AI chat tools and
extended reality (XR) interfaces with robot manipulators.
Supplementing a person’s physical limitations while making
full use of their cognitive ability allows for a more inclusive
workforce [10]. Some key works looking at HRC for physically disabled persons include mapping physical limitations
to appropriate robot technology [18], and adapting interface
modality for visually impaired users [8]. Key advantages of
multimodal and adaptive communication methods are improving user experience through personalised choice, greater
reliability through redundancy and increased accessibility. By
developing multimodal communications as standard, persons
with sensor impairments, e.g. deaf, blind, or those with
communication limitations e.g. mute, limited dexterity, can
still interact with a collaborative workcell. Adaptation to
physical factors is primarily through workcell and interface
design, discussed further in Section IV.
3) Mental Factors: Mental variation examples include
learning speed, comprehension ability, concentration span or
traits associated with neurodivergence e.g. dyslexia, ADHD
and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). A discussion on
technology enabling the inclusion of disabled workers is
presented in [10], with some key highlights presented here.
Kildal et al. reduce the cognitive load of interpreting
complex assembly instructions for workers unable to perform
this step of the task. A robot gives specific instructions for
where to connect wires to, allowing the user to perform dexterous tasks under the guidance of the robotic assistant [31].
This is further developed with increased personalisation so
workers with different abilities can choose the amount of as-

Analysis of key human factors HRC is adapted to.

discuss the various factors to which a robot may adapt. In the
following subsections, key aspects of inter- and intra- user
variation are highlighted, with examples of adaptive HRC.
A. Inter-User Variation
Inter-user variation encompasses differences between users
that are predominantly static for a single user. Variation can
take various forms and may be related to identity, physical or
mental factors. Some key works researching HRC adaptation
based on inter-personal variation are discussed below.
1) Identity Factors: Identity factors include a user’s cultural background, language, sex, age, etc. The increasing
complexity of communication between robot and human
in manufacturing, and the growing ability for speech/text
recognition and comprehension with the use of Large Language Models (LLMs), is giving rise to language-based
interfaces [3], [24]. However, in a varied workforce consideration must be given to whether users can speak and
interpret such commands sufficiently well, and whether other
factors such as a user’s accent or dialect may prevent them
from having their speech recognised. One of the few outputs
acknowledging the different language needs of users is [25].
Non-verbal communication is an important method of
communication but is not necessarily consistent across cultures. Facial expression recognition for use in HRC tasks
has been investigated [26], however there is a lack of
acknowledgement for how results may change with cultural
background which is known to have an impact [27]. User
preference for interaction modality, implicit or explicit communication, and proximity to humans has been investigated
with social robots, identifying key differences between cultures as well as significant variation within demographic
225

Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sistance required from the robot counterpart on demand [32].
Adaptation of collaborative assembly instructions for users
with visual and/or cognitive impairment has been shown
through adaptable displays, multimodal (touch, speech, audio) interfaces and the ability for users to switch mid-task
promoting varied work tasks [8]. Analysis of differences in
the behavioural patterns of neurotypical vs ASD operators
during a HRC manufacturing task provided insights on
factors such as task prioritisation, gaze, facial expressions,
ability to adapt and performance, highlighting the need for
adaptable interfaces for diverse users [33].
Mandischer et al. present a method for mapping various personal factors, such as ergonomics, motor function,
cognition and body motion, along with how their abilities
change over time (e.g. due to fatigue). The system can then
allocate appropriate tasks to the user or robot for optimal
completion. A key advantage is the applicability to people
with disabilities, as well as able-bodied, elderly and injured
people to adapt to the person’s current working ability [9].

optimise behaviour based on multiple, potentially conflicting
parameters, and the varying level of user preference as to
how much control they have over a robot’s behaviour.
3) Fatigue: Fatigue is a key consideration investigated
in different works given its influence on productivity and
user experience. Experiments with high and low levels of
automation assistance in a collaborative polishing task found
the high level of assistance helped enable fatigue recovery,
however this reduces operator situational awareness [28]. Future advanced HRC workcells may help increase situational
awareness through sensing and intelligence [39].
4) Emotion: The recognition of a wide range of emotions
for use in human state monitoring has been discussed in
relation to smart manufacturing [40] and the development
of human digital twins [41]. Emotion recognition methods
include facial expression [26] and physiological data [42],
[43]. Emotion recognition can be used to adapt a robot’s
behaviour, such as speed, location and delay, based on a
user’s current emotional state [42], [43].
A holistic review of the HRC experience highlights emotional intelligence as a key requirement, along with conversational skills, embodied intelligence, and the need to balance
human autonomy with control [39]. Limited discussion has
been had on which emotions should be recognised and for
what purpose in the context of HRC. Recognition of sensitive
personal information by an employer has significant privacy,
legal and ethical concerns, discussed further in Section VI.
5) Cognitive Load Monitoring: Various works have investigated monitoring cognitive load during HRC. The NASATLX questionnaire is a common method for assessing workload and has been used in HRC tasks to assess user workload
under different robot conditions [28], [44]. For online workload monitoring, heart rate variability (HRV) has been used
to increase robot assistance during high-stress conditions [45]
and adjust the robot control parameters [46]. A study looking
at online and offline metrics found observability and transparency of robot actions impact user cognitive load, and
validated that the proposed novel online metrics correlate
well with standard offline metrics [17].

B. Intra-User Variation
Intra-user variation concerns the changing state of an
individual user over time. These factors include the user’s
emotional state, stress, fatigue, experience level and task
competence. Adaptive user-centred HRC requires real-time
reaction to the user’s current physical and cognitive state.
1) Stress: For many users, working with cobots may be a
new experience. This, combined with the dynamic nature of
the technology, can lead to stress while working alongside
cobots. Investigations have found users experience higher
stress when approaching and programming a robot for the
first time, although this reduces with time [17], [34].
Focussing on measuring stress objectively using electrocardiogram (ECG), the speed of a robot was adjusted
to match that of a user in a collaborative assembly task.
By correctly matching their speed, the method maintained
high production levels while reducing the user’s stress. A
key point raised is that the user’s experience of stress is
subjective, therefore the objective measures used do not
necessarily capture the full picture [35]. A similar work
demonstrated the benefits of adjusting robot speed based
on user stress and pace to maintain good productivity with
reduced stress compared to no adjustment in robot speed or
only adjusting based on the user’s speed [36].
2) Trust: Trust is key for effective HRC, with a critical
need for user trust in a system to be correctly calibrated to
its ability. Otherwise, the system risks being used inappropriately due to over trust or unused due to lack of trust [37].
Investigating a user’s trust in a robot during tasks that were
either high or low proximity, and high or low risk, showed
the user had greater trust in low risk, low proximity situations [38]. Further developments investigated adjusting the
robot’s velocity, separation and proximity to the user’s head
based on user trust. Users with HRC experience were happy
to manually tune parameters while novice users preferred the
system to automatically choose optimal parameters [20]. This
work highlights key points around the need to balance and

C. Human Digital Twin
Modelling a user’s various physical, mental and emotional
traits, preferences and abilities leads to the concept of a
Human Digital Twin (HDT) [40], [41]. The use of the
term HDT is not necessarily consistent across the literature,
hence a cross-domain analysis was conducted and provides
useful insights and definitions on what constitutes a HDT,
human digital model and human digital shadow [14]. In their
definition, a HDT must provide a digital representation of a
specific individual, with automatic data transfer from human
to twin and twin to human.
The concept of digital twins for I5.0 in relation to extended
reality (XR) technologies is discussed in detail by Kiourtis et
al. The current status of “onesize-fits-all” XR solutions disregards the unique requirements and preferences of workers
which should be considered for effective use in I5.0 [41]. The
user model presented as part of the SHAREWORK project
226

Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

illustrates the use of a diverse model in a complete manufacturing task setup. A user’s physical, health, cognitive,
expertise and performance states are used to inform HRC [5].
While some human factors can be monitored or modelled
reliably with current technology, others present a significant
challenge. Modelling cognitive state is an ambition presented
in [14], though simpler HDTs can still provide benefits to
HRC in many practical applications.
The overarching concept of HDT requires monitoring and
storing of user characteristics over time, enabling predictions
and insights to be gained. This raises significant ethical and
regulatory questions that are frequently not considered in the
research and will be discussed further in Section VI.

V. C OLLABORATIVE TASK C OMPLETION
A further area for personal differences in HRC manufacturing is how a task progresses to be completed. For a given
task with multiple subtasks, there is significant scope for
variation in which agent performs which actions, in what
order the actions are performed, and how long a specific
agent may take to do a task.
A. Task Allocation
Various works have investigated the assignment of actions
to a robot or human during the planning of a task based on
their respective capabilities. These methods do not necessarily account for the individual characteristics and abilities
of unique workers, hence the subsequent examples focus on
investigations that consider solutions tailored to individuals.
The need for task allocation to take into account multiple factors including “productivity, flexibility, and human
factors” is investigated in [6], where a multiobjective action
allocation optimisation method considers makespan, human
energy expenditure and mental workload. Subsequent developments include a real-time dynamic system [23] and
individualisation to workers, with personalised rest allocation
based on age, bodyweight and gender used to help balance
the assembly line [49].
Task scheduling optimisation in a multi-user, HRC task
using personalised fatigue models was investigated to jointly
optimise for cycle time while minimising team fatigue or an
individual’s fatigue [50]. A motivating factor for the work
is promoting fairness of job allocation between workers,
however this raises the need for consideration as to what
constitutes fair job allocation. A genetic algorithm method
balanced worker energy expenditure and noise exposure for
a task rotation plan, with individual characteristics (age,
weight, height, gender, skill level and cost) considered in
the plan, creating a more ergonomic work environment [30].
A key work using dynamic fatigue assessment and task
allocation is [51], however the work requires further development to optimise for multiple factors. The benefits
of adaptive task allocation in HRC to maintain well-being
and motivation with reduced monotony are discussed in
detail [39], though few works have investigated adaptive
planning with this as the focus.

IV. HRC I NTERACTION D ESIGN
The new paradigm of humans and robots working together
has necessitated developing spaces for effective HRC. Much
of the research in this area takes a human-centric and taskefficiency approach. In this study however, we focus on
works with a user-centric view, where aspects of the workcell
and interaction are adjustable to individual users.
Fletcher et al. highlight the support from industry workers
for “the development of adaptive, flexible and self-optimising
assembly systems of the future to meet both production
and operator changes and differences, and the use of novel
technologies”. The work goes on to caveat this with the
limited demographic of users surveyed, highlighting the need
for broader studies investigating cultural differences across
a range of demographics [16]. Also highlighted is the desire
for Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) as
methods of delivering information, instructions and training.
Various studies have developed systems with personalisable
communication modalities and interface design. The multimodal, customisable nature of interfaces, including AR, a
tablet and a smartwatch, were found to be key benefits in
HRC manufacturing [19].
The level of instruction provided to a user should be
adaptable based on their expertise and experience. This is
demonstrated through the gradual removal of information
from novices to experienced users in AR [5]. In a similar
work, the rate of information decay during training using AR
was adapted to the user [47]. This highlighted the importance
of giving personalised information to the user for efficient
learning and the complexity of doing this in practice, with a
need for further investigations on broader populations.
Personalised gesture meaning for robot communication
has been shown to reduce physical and mental workload [48].
The work also highlights the need for workers to move
between workstations, hence having adaptable interfaces
reduces the need for users to learn different systems. The
growing prevalence of generative AI language tools presents
a key shift in possibility for human-robot communication [3].
The GPT based dialogue tool ToD4IR is significant given
its ability for practical task-oriented discussion and natural, small talk style language [24]. Being able to converse
naturally with a robot may help unskilled users interact
confidently, a task which may otherwise be stressful [34].

B. Task Timing
Users perform actions at different speeds, and that speed
will vary over time based on factors such as experience
and fatigue. For optimal synchronisation with a user, it is
beneficial to model prior expectations of how long they will
take on a task (e.g. based on previous experience), and also
adapt based on real-time monitoring of task progression.
Adaptive action timing prediction has been investigated
based on current action recognition and adjustment based
on previous experience from the user [52], enabling synchronisation of collaborative actions. A further example of
time planning uses Bayesian Reinforcement Learning (RL)
to adjust the speed of a robot feeding an assembly line. The
227

Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

method adjusts the robot speed to match the speed of different workers on different tasks, balancing the assembly line
and helping prevent workers from feeling overloaded [22].
Action timeline planning while accounting for duration uncertainty is investigated with the ROXANNE planner, where
integrating a personalised duration expectation and expected
variance in duration based on worker experience level helps
create an adaptive task planner for collaborative tasks [5].

stress” highlights the use of machines which allow variable
user pose, avoid imposed rates of work and use self-evolving
behaviour for different communication modalities, including
transparency of actions [58]. The EU AI Act presents guidance on a range of relevant points. Given the unreliability and
intrusiveness of recognising emotion from biometric data,
restriction is given to prohibit the recognition of emotion
in workplace settings. This includes “happiness, sadness,
anger, [etc.]” but does not include physical states such
as pain and fatigue. Included under the high-risk category
is the use of AI “to allocate tasks based on individual
behaviour or personal traits or characteristics or to monitor
and evaluate the performance and behaviour of persons in
such relationships” [59]. Various challenges related to AI
implementation in manufacturing still exist, such as security, feedback integration, explainability, accountability, and
uncertainty awareness [12].
GDPR provides various regulations on the use of personal
data in the workplace, particularly around profiling employees with respect to sensitive information [57]. While the
storing and use of personal data are protected, an employee
may feel pressured by an employer to consent to the use
of their data in a personalised HRC setting where greater
efficiencies can be achieved. The significant ethical and security considerations for storing personal data in the context
of HDTs is an area needing further research [14]. Particularly
for task allocation and scheduling, various research outputs
are increasingly using highly personal characteristics. For
example, using age, gender and BMI to design work schedules based on predicted comfortable working duration, with
explicit prioritisation of older workers [29], or rest allocation
based on age, weight and gender [49]. Although well intentioned, these methods present significant opportunities for
profiling workers based on protected characteristics which
should be carefully considered in future developments.
The development over recent years of regulations that
consider the use of AI, personal data and intelligent machines
has helped provide guidance on how such technologies may
be used, particularly relevant in the case of personalised
HRC in industry. As technologies are developed and brought
to market, further discussion and updates to regulation will
be required. Particularly in the EU, the desire for a usercentric I5.0 [2] may align in vision with the protections and
guidelines of other regulations [57], [58], [59], but in practice
there may be tensions in deploying new technologies.

C. User Preference
Users may exhibit preference as to how a task should
progress towards completion. For example, what order actions occur in [21], or on which tasks they would like
assistance. Investigations found workers have a preference
for having input on task allocation decisions, rather than
relying on a foreman or automated system to decide for
them [53]. Similar findings were reported in [54], which
also found workers tend to prefer allocating physical tasks
to robots while keeping cognitive tasks for themselves.
The real-time adaptation of robot behaviour using a partially observable Markov model allows for dynamic replanning, error recovery and adaptation to user preference. The
method allows a robot to decide when to retrieve parts/tools,
clear the workspace or assist the user by holding a part, while
implicitly learning the user’s preference on-the-fly [55].
VI. E THICAL AND S AFETY C ONSIDERATIONS
The benefits of personalised HRC are numerous and include improved well-being, efficiency, safety and inclusivity
of a varied workforce. However, personalised HRC also
raises various ethical and safety considerations which are not
discussed substantially in the research [56]. While a review
of safety in collaborative intelligence is available [15], this
section highlights and builds on particularly salient points
for personalised HRC in manufacturing.
Control strategies that adapt to different users present the
opportunity for improved user perception and greater safety
through real-time collision avoidance. However, adaptive and
unpredictable movements may lead to reduced trust and
decreased safety if errors occur. The variability of workers,
uncertainty in human behaviour and probabilistic AI methods
present challenges when ensuring safe and consistent performance [15]. Novel risk assessment methods are required in
light of adaptable and dynamic robotic systems [5].
Discussing the data privacy of workers considering highly
personalised systems is crucial. Insights from surveys of
manufacturing workers highlight the desire for personnel to
have access to their personal data and the need for strict
data security and protection [16]. In this emerging field,
various regulations need to be considered and reviewed as
technologies develop. In Europe, relevant regulations include
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [57], the EU
Machinery Regulation [58] , and the EU AI Act [59].
The Machinery Regulation (EU) 2023/1230 now includes
reference to machines with self-evolving behaviour in relation to control and ergonomics. Guidance on reducing
operator “discomfort, fatigue and physical and psychological

VII. D ISCUSSION ON F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
One of the clearest needs for future developments is
improved experimentation through a broad range of representative participants with rigorous methods and analysis. The
validity of increasingly personalised interactions can only be
shown through testing on a range of participants, an area
in which many research outputs lack rigour. This requires
greater cross-disciplinary integration, where experiments are
conducted in collaboration with experts in biomechanics,
psychology, human factors, etc. This is linked to the lack of
research focussing on consistency previously identified [7].
228

Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research on increased accessibility of HRC for users with
disabilities has started, though there is significant room for
further development [10], [56]. Instead of specialising HRC
platforms for specific disabilities, a broader focus on highly
adaptive, multimodal interfaces allowing accessibility to a
broad range of users may be more impactful. This promotes
the inclusion of a wide spectrum of users, including those
with and without disabilities, and encourages the expectation
of user-adaptable systems, as highlighted in [9].
Various works have been shown to help reduce the negative physical and mental impacts of collaborative manufacturing tasks through adaptive behaviour. Further developments
may take a proactive role in promoting user well-being,
for example through prompting regular (active) breaks and
engaging a user’s mental capacities by providing levels of
autonomy [39] and stimulation throughout a task.
Monitoring of various physical and mental parameters,
such as ergonomics, emotion, working speed, and preferences, have been discussed in the literature for adaptable
robot control. However, there lacks a rigorous and consistent methodology for modelling a HDT [14]. Developing a
unified approach would enable greater collaborative research
and present a grounded framework from which ethical and
regulatory questions can be discussed. The parameters modelled should have clear reasons for being monitored, and
such a system must ensure high levels of inbuilt security to
protect workers’ privacy.
Surprisingly, it is foreseeable that some of the technologies
discussed could lead to a reduced user-centric focus. While
the technologies are developed to increase well-being and
promote customised interactions based on individual needs,
the opposite effect could be realised. From a business perspective, by transferring the burden of considering individual
needs from managers to technology, employees may lose
their individuality. This is seen in the development of methods to adapt task scheduling according to individual ability
and personal characteristics [29], [30], [49]. In such scenarios, employees have limited opportunity to work according
to their subjective experience as the system has dictated their
ability, and it is assumed this gives a fair assessment of their
current capacity. Such arguments may be speculative, but
consideration should be given to ensure human needs beyond
the scope of technological developments are accounted for.
Unification of metrics for assessing the suitability of
personalised HRC technologies are required for reliable and
comparative results. A range of methods are currently used in
research, primarily falling into the categories of business (e.g.
cycle rates, completion times, cost effectiveness, etc.), human
factors (e.g. user acceptance, stress, fatigue, ergonomics, etc.)
and technological (e.g. accuracy, error rate, latency, etc.).
Evaluating relevant factors across the three categories should
be normalised, with an emphasis on increasing the analysis of
user perspectives towards new technological developments.
The need for increased analysis of individual experiences
in HRC is also highlighted in [11], where a conceptual
framework for examining human factors is presented.
Future developments will lead to an increased variety of

robot behaviours which can be comprehensively adapted.
Personalisation for user experience, proactivity, multi-user
engagement and generalisation across diverse and new tasks
may be included. These developments will coincide with a
greater focus on diverse robot platforms, such as mobile
bases, humanoids and quadrupeds, giving added personalisation opportunities not possible with table-mounted cobot
arms used in the majority of current research.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
There has been a growing trend of personalised HRC in
manufacturing over recent years, in part due to the ambitions
of Industry 5.0. This review has shed light on key aspects of
personalised HRC, including which personal factors are used,
how robot interfaces and experiences are customised and how
collaborative task completion can be adapted to individuals.
There has been a further discussion on ethical and regulatory
considerations, which are often not fully discussed in the
literature. Further more, key avenues of future research and
associated guidance are presented in what promises to be a
growing field of research.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme
under Grant Agreement no. 101059903 and 101135708.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Xu, Y. Lu, B. Vogel-Heuser, and L. Wang, “Industry 4.0 and
Industry 5.0—Inception, conception and perception,” J. Manuf. Syst.,
vol. 61, pp. 530–535, 2021.
[2] Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (European
Commission), M. Breque, L. De Nul, and A. Petridis, Industry
5.0: towards a sustainable, human centric and resilient European
industry. Publications Office of the European Union, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/308407
[3] M. Dhanda, B. A. Rogers, S. Hall, E. Dekoninck, and V. Dhokia,
“Reviewing human-robot collaboration in manufacturing: Opportunities and challenges in the context of industry 5.0,” Robot. Comput.
Integr. Manuf., vol. 93, p. 102937, 2025.
[4] A. Simões, A. Pinto, J. Santos, S. Pinheiro and D. Romero, “Designing
human-robot collaboration (HRC) workspaces in industrial settings: A
systematic literature review,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 62, pp. 28–43, 2022.
[5] A. Umbrico et al., “Design of advanced human–robot collaborative
cells for personalized human–robot collaborations,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12,
no. 14, 2022.
[6] M. Calzavara, M. Faccio, and I. Granata, “Multi-objective task allocation for collaborative robot systems with an Industry 5.0 human-centered
perspective,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 128, pp. 297–314, 2023.
[7] M. Faccio et al., “Human factors in cobot era: a review of modern production systems features,” J. Intell. Manuf., vol. 34, pp. 85–106, 2023.
[8] M. Stöhr, M. Schneider, and C. Henkel, “Adaptive work instructions
for people with disabilities in the context of human robot collaboration,” in IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Ind. Inform. (INDIN), 2018, pp. 301–308.
[9] N. Mandischer et al., “Toward adaptive human–robot collaboration
for the inclusion of people with disabilities in manual labor tasks,”
Electronics, vol. 12, no. 5, 2023.
[10] M. Rojas et al., “Lack of verified inclusive technology for workers
with disabilities in industry 4.0: a systematic review,” Int. J. Sustain.
Eng., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 190–210, 2024.
[11] J. Vermeulen, G. Caldwell, M. Teixeira, A. Burden, and M. Guertler,
“To safety and beyond! A scoping review of human factors enriching
the design of human-robot collaboration,” Interact. Des. and Archit.,
no. 61, pp. 42–65, 2024.
[12] D. Li et al., “Trustworthy AI for human-centric smart manufacturing:
A survey,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 78, pp. 308–327, 2025.

229
Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[36] C. Messeri, G. Masotti, A. Zanchettin, and P. Rocco, “Human-robot
collaboration: Optimizing stress and productivity based on game
theory,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 8061–8068,
2021.
[37] B. Gebru et al., “A review on human–machine trust evaluation:
Human-centric and machine-centric perspectives,” IEEE Trans. on
Human-Machine Syst., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 952–962, 2022.
[38] G. Campagna and M. Rehm, “Analysis of proximity and risk for
trust evaluation in human-robot collaboration,” 32nd IEEE Conf. Robot
Human Interactive Commun. (RO-MAN), pp. 2191–2196, 2023.
[39] N. Berx, W. Decré, J. De Schutter, and L. Pintelon, “A harmonious synergy between robotic performance and well-being in human-robot collaboration: A vision and key recommendations,” Annu. Rev. Control,
vol. 59, 2025.
[40] B. Wang, P. Zheng, Y. Yin, A. Shih, and L. Wang, “Toward humancentric smart manufacturing: A human-cyber-physical systems (HCPS)
perspective,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 63, pp. 471–490, 2022.
[41] A. Kiourtis et al., “Xr5.0: Human-centric AI-enabled extended reality
applications for industry 5.0,” in 36th IEEE Conf. Open Innov. Assoc.
(FRUCT), 2024, pp. 314–323.
[42] A. Eyam, W. Mohammed, and J. Martinez Lastra, “Emotion-driven
analysis and control of human-robot interactions in collaborative
applications,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14, 2021.
[43] R. Gervasi, K. Aliev, L. Mastrogiacomo, and F. Franceschini, “User
experience and physiological response in human-robot collaboration:
A preliminary investigation,” J. Intell. and Robot. Syst.: Theory and
Appl., vol. 106, no. 2, 2022.
[44] A. Javernik, B. Buchmeister, and R. Ojstersek, “The NASA-TLX approach to understand workers workload in human-robot collaboration,”
Int. J. Simul. Model., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 574–585, 2023.
[45] C. Landi, V. Villani, F. Ferraguti, L. Sabattini, C. Secchi, and C. Fantuzzi, “Relieving operators’ workload: Towards affective robotics in
industrial scenarios,” MECHATRONICS, vol. 54, pp. 144–154, 2018.
[46] M. Lagomarsino, M. Lorenzini, E. De Momi, and A. Ajoudani, “Robot
trajectory adaptation to optimise the trade-off between human cognitive ergonomics and workplace productivity in collaborative tasks,” in
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), 2022, pp. 663–669.
[47] J. Li et al., “Adaptive information decay: A potentially effective
approach to enhancing the impact of augmented reality on training
for manual assembly tasks,” Int. J. Human–Comput. Interact., pp. 1–
24, 2024.
[48] S. Rautiainen et al., “Multimodal interface for human–robot collaboration,” Machines, vol. 10, no. 10, 2022.
[49] A. Keshvarparast, N. Katiraee, S. Finco, and M. Calzavara, “Integrating collaboration scenarios and workforce individualization in collaborative assembly line balancing,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., p. 109450, 2024.
[50] S. Chand and Y. Lu, “Dual task scheduling strategy for personalized
multi-objective optimization of cycle time and fatigue in human-robot
collaboration,” Manuf. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 88–95, 2023.
[51] Y. You, B. Cai, D. Pham, Y. Liu, and Z. Ji, “A human digital twin
approach for fatigue-aware task planning in human-robot collaborative
assembly,” Comput. and Ind. Eng., vol. 200, 2025.
[52] J. Male and U. Martinez-Hernandez, “Deep learning based robot cognitive architecture for collaborative assembly tasks,” Robot. Comput.
Integr. Manuf., vol. 83, 2023.
[53] A. Tausch, C. Peifer, B. Kirchhoff, and A. Kluge, “Human-robot interaction: How worker influence in task allocation improves autonomy,”
ERGONOMICS, vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 1230–1244, 2022.
[54] C. Schmidbauer, S. Zafari, B. Hader, and S. Schlund, “An empirical
study on workers’ preferences in human–robot task assignment in
industrial assembly systems,” IEEE Trans. Human-Machine Syst.,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 293–302, 2023.
[55] O. Mangin, A. Roncone, and B. Scassellati, “How to be helpful? Supportive behaviors and personalization for human-robot collaboration,”
Frontiers Robot. and AI, vol. 8, 2022.
[56] B. Šumak, S. Brdnik, and M. Pušnik, “Sensors and artificial intelligence methods and algorithms for human–computer intelligent interaction: A systematic mapping study,” Sensors, vol. 22, p. 20, 2022.
[57] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
[Online]. Available: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679
[58] ——. Regulation (EU) 2023/1230 of the European Parliament and of the
Council. [Online]. Available: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/1230
[59] ——. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the
Council. [Online]. Available: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689

[13] N. Gasteiger, M. Hellou, and H. S. Ahn, “Factors for personalization
and localization to optimize human–robot interaction: A literature
review,” Int. J. Social Robot., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 689–701, 2023.
[14] B. Gaffinet, J. Al Haj Ali, Y. Naudet, and H. Panetto, “Human digital
twins: A systematic literature review and concept disambiguation for
industry 5.0,” Comput. in Industry, vol. 166, p. 104230, 2025.
[15] I. F. Ramos, G. Gianini, M. C. Leva, and E. Damiani, “Collaborative
intelligence for safety-critical industries: A literature review,” Information, vol. 15, no. 11, p. 728, 2024.
[16] S. Fletcher et al., “Adaptive automation assembly: Identifying system
requirements for technical efficiency and worker satisfaction,” Comput.
and Ind. Eng., vol. 139, 2020.
[17] M. Lagomarsino, M. Lorenzini, P. Balatti, E. Momi, and A. Ajoudani,
“Pick the right co-worker: Online assessment of cognitive ergonomics
in human-robot collaborative assembly,” IEEE Trans. on Cogn. and
Develop. Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1928–1937, 2023.
[18] A. Lottermoser, G. Yucel, and J. Berger, “Method for the selection
of an intuitive robotic assistant to support physically challenged
employees,” in Procedia CIRP, vol. 126, 2024, pp. 218–223.
[19] D. Andronas, G. Apostolopoulos, N. Fourtakas, and S. Makris,
“Multi-modal interfaces for natural human-robot interaction,” Procedia
Manuf., vol. 54, pp. 197–202, 2021.
[20] G. Campagna et al., “Promoting trust in industrial human-robot
collaboration through preference-based optimization,” IEEE Robot.
and Automat. Lett., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 9255–9262, 2024.
[21] O. Obidat, J. Parron, R. Li, J. Rodano, and W. Wang, “Development
of a teaching-learning-prediction-collaboration model for human-robot
collaborative tasks,” in IEEE 13th Int. Conf. CYBER Technol. Automat., Control, and Intell. Syst. (CYBER), 2023, pp. 728–733.
[22] H. Lee, S. Park, and J. Lee, “Bayesian reinforcement learning for adaptive balancing in an assembly line with human-robot collaboration,”
IEEE ACCESS, vol. 12, pp. 172 256–172 265, 2024.
[23] M. Calzavara, M. Faccio, I. Granata, and A. Trevisani, “Achieving
productivity and operator well-being: a dynamic task allocation strategy for collaborative assembly systems in Industry 5.0,” Int. J. Adv.
Manuf. Technol., vol. 134, no. 7-8, pp. 3201–3216, 2024.
[24] C. Li, X. Zhang, D. Chrysostomou, and H. Yang, “ToD4IR: A
humanised task-oriented dialogue system for industrial robots,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 91 631–91 649, 2022.
[25] I. Freire, O. Guerrero-Rosado, A. Amil, and P. Verschure, “Socially
adaptive cognitive architecture for human-robot collaboration in industrial settings,” Frontiers Robot. and AI, vol. 11, 2024.
[26] A. Chiurco et al., “Real-time detection of worker’s emotions for
advanced human-robot interaction during collaborative tasks in smart
factories,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 200, pp. 1875–1884, 2022.
[27] R. E. Jack, O. G. B. Garrod, H. Yu, R. Caldara, and P. G. Schyns,
“Facial expressions of emotion are not culturally universal,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 109, no. 19, pp. 7241–7244, 2012.
[28] S. Hopko, R. Khurana, R. Mehta, and P. Pagilla, “Effect of cognitive fatigue, operator sex, and robot assistance on task performance metrics, workload, and situation awareness in human-robot collaboration,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3049–3056, 2021.
[29] V. Pabolu, D. Shrivastava, and M. Kulkarni, “Development of intelligent system to consider worker’s comfortable work duration in assembly line work scheduling,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 78, pp. 226–243, 2025.
[30] M. D. Mura and G. Dini, “Improving ergonomics in mixed-model
assembly lines balancing noise exposure and energy expenditure,”
CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. and Technol., vol. 40, pp. 44–52, 2023.
[31] J. Kildal, M. Martı́n, I. Ipiña, and I. Maurtua, “Empowering assembly
workers with cognitive disabilities by working with collaborative robots:
a study to capture design requirements,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 81, pp.
797–802, 2019.
[32] J. Kildal, I. Ipiña, M. Martı́n, and I. Maurtua, “Collaborative assembly
of electrical cabinets through multimodal interaction between a robot
and a human worker with cognitive disability,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 97,
pp. 184–189, 2021.
[33] M. Mondellini et al., “Behavioral patterns in robotic collaborative
assembly: comparing neurotypical and Autism Spectrum Disorder
participants,” Frontiers Psychol., vol. 14, 2023.
[34] S. Borghi, A. Ruo, L. Sabattini, M. Peruzzini, and V. Villani, “Assessing operator stress in collaborative robotics: A multimodal approach,”
Appl. Ergonom., vol. 123, p. 104418, 2025.
[35] R. Ojsteršek, B. Buchmeister, and A. Javernik, “Personalizing humanrobot workplace parameters in human-centered manufacturing,” Machines, vol. 12, no. 8, 2024.

230
Authorized licensed use limited to: Penn State University. Downloaded on September 03,2026 at 15:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

