FairTutor: Equity-Aware Pedagogical LLM Routing for
Budget-Constrained AI Tutoring
Qingyang Xu1
1

Independent researcher, Shanghai, China

arXiv:2606.20713v1 [cs.AI] 16 Jun 2026

Abstract

Generative AI tutors provide real-time, personalized learning support, but also create a new education inequity:
students with access to premium AI services may receive clearer explanations, more personalized guidance,
and better scaffolding than students limited to free or low-cost services. To address this challenge, we propose
FairTutor, an equity-aware model-routing framework that achieves cost-effective AI tutoring via pedagogically
motivated multi-agent orchestration. FairTutor combines query analysis, pedagogical planning, low-cost model
generation, evaluator-guided critique and revision, and selective escalation to premium AI models. We introduce
access-tier AI Education (AIED) Advantage Gap to measure the quality difference between premium-access and
budget-constrained tutoring, and TutorAccessEval, a benchmark spanning math, reading, writing, science, and
language learning. Empirical evaluations show that FairTutor achieves 97.1% of premium pedagogical quality (in
floor-adjusted Likert scale) while reducing serving cost by 71.6%. Sensitivity analysis reveals a tunable cost–quality
Pareto frontier, enabling FairTutor to be tailored to the needs of diverse student populations.

Keywords

AI education, large language model, model routing, cost-aware routing, access-tier quality parity, multi-agent
systems

1. Introduction
Generative AI systems have fundamentally changed how students in all grade levels seek help for their
studies. A high-quality AI tutor can provide real-time personalized feedback and support, and may also
inspire the student to think more creatively and systematically through Socratic questioning [10, 11].
However, these benefits are not evenly shared across all student populations. As premium AI services
provide clearer explanations, more personalized guidance, and better scaffolding than free or low-cost
services, the quality of AI tutoring depends heavily on the student’s access tier.
One natural solution to mitigate this access-tier quality gap is to route easier queries to low-cost
models and route difficult or risky queries to stronger models. Recent LLM routing and cascading
methods study this cost–quality tradeoff in generic settings [3, 4, 5]. However, AI tutoring presents
unique challenges to this question-answering framework. A response can be factually correct but
pedagogically poor if it gives away the final answer, ignores the learner’s misconception, uses ageinappropriate language, or fails to scaffold reasoning. The routing system must be pedagogically
motivated.
To address this challenge, we propose FairTutor 1 , a multi-agent architecture designed to maximize
pedagogical quality under education budget constraints. FairTutor processes each student query
through query analysis, pedagogical planning, low-cost generation, pedagogical evaluation, criticguided revision, and selective escalation to stronger models. Unlike existing routers, FairTutor explicitly
estimates and reduces the gap between premium-access and budget-constrained tutoring quality. We
name this metric the access-tier AI Education (AIED) Advantage Gap, which measures equity across
pricing tiers rather than demographic groups. The latter will be addressed in future work.
This WIP makes four main contributions to the research literature (reviewed in Appendix E):
AI for Education Day at KDD 2026, August 2026, Jeju, Korea
email: qyxu1994@gmail.com (Q. Xu)
orcid: 0000-0003-3342-1795 (Q. Xu)
© 2026 Copyright for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
1

Repository: https://github.com/qyxu1994/fairtutor-router.

1. We formulate the access-tier equity-aware AI tutoring as a constrained model-routing optimization
problem (Eq. 2) guided by pedagogical quality, cost, and access-tier disparity metrics.
2. We introduce FairTutor (Figure 1), a pedagogically motivated multi-agent architecture that
combines query analysis, pedagogical planning, critic-guided revision, and selective escalation.
3. We propose the new metric access-tier AIED Advantage Gap (Eq. 1) for measuring how much
access to premium AI services improves pedagogical quality over budget-constrained access.
4. We present the design of TutorAccessEval (in Appendix D), a novel benchmark dataset for
evaluating cost, pedagogical quality, safety, and access-tier equity for AI tutoring systems.

2. Problem Formulation
Let 𝑥 ∈ 𝒳 denote a student’s query for the AI tutor. Each query includes the student’s question and
metadata such as learning subject, grade level, estimated difficulty, and pedagogical context. A tutoring
system chooses an action or workflow 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜, where 𝑎 may correspond to low-cost model generation,
retrieval-augmented generation, critic-guided revision, or escalation to a high-cost premium model.
Each action produces a response 𝑦 = 𝑓𝑎 (𝑥) with cost 𝐶(𝑎, 𝑥) and pedagogical quality 𝑄(𝑦, 𝑥). We
estimate 𝑄 using a rubric that scores correctness, conceptual clarity, scaffolding, grade appropriateness,
answer-leakage avoidance, empathy, and safety. Let 𝜋 : 𝒳 → 𝒜 be a routing policy. To model the
access-tier quality gap, we define a premium-access policy 𝜋premium (which always routes to premium
AI models) and a budget-constrained policy 𝜋budget (which selectively routes to either low-cost or
premium AI models). For a query distribution 𝒟, we define the access-tier AIED Advantage Gap as
[︁
]︁
ΔAIED = E𝑥∼𝒟 𝑄(𝑓𝜋premium (𝑥) (𝑥), 𝑥) − 𝑄(𝑓𝜋budget (𝑥) (𝑥), 𝑥) .
(1)
In general, ΔAIED > 0 and a smaller value indicates that budget-constrained students receive tutoring
quality closer to premium-access students. In this WIP we focus on equity across API pricing tiers, and
leave student demographic equity to future work. The FairTutor objective is formulated as
max E[𝑄] − 𝜆E[𝐶] − 𝛾ΔAIED ,

𝜋budget

(2)

where 𝜆, 𝛾 > 0 control cost and access-tier gap penalties. For WIP implementation, we instantiate
this objective with threshold-based routing and evaluator-guided escalation (Algorithm 1) rather than
a learned policy. We perform hyperparameter sweep for the escalation threshold to identify the
cost–quality tradeoff and leave the systematic optimization of FairTutor objective (Eq. 2) in future work.

3. FairTutor Architecture
3.1. System overview
FairTutor is a multi-agent system with six components: a query analyzer, a pedagogical planner, a
low-cost tutor generator, a pedagogical evaluator, a critic-rewriter, and an escalation controller (Figure 1).

3.2. Query analysis and pedagogical planning
Given a student query, the query analyzer analyzes the subject, grade level, difficulty, direct-answer
risk, and whether the query requires multi-step reasoning. The pedagogical planner then selects a
tutoring strategy, such as Socratic hinting, a worked example, misconception diagnosis, analogy, short
formative quiz, or writing feedback. Two queries with similar lexical content may require different
responses depending on whether the learner needs a hint, conceptual explanation, or final verification.

Figure 1: FairTutor workflow. A low-cost tutor produces an initial response; the evaluator accepts it, sends it
to a low-cost critic-rewriter, or escalates it to the premium tutor. To reduce the overall cost of AI tutoring, all
modules except the Premium Tutor use the low-cost model.

3.3. Evaluator-guided routing
The first candidate response is generated by a low-cost AI tutor. The pedagogical evaluator scores
the response on seven criteria: correctness, conceptual clarity, scaffolding, grade appropriateness,
answer-leakage avoidance, empathy, and safety. The final pedagogical quality score 𝑄 is:
𝑄 = 0.30𝑄corr +0.20𝑄clarity +0.20𝑄scaffold +0.10𝑄age +0.10𝑄leak +0.05𝑄empathy +0.05𝑄safety . (3)
A response is returned if it exceeds all quality thresholds. If the response is close to acceptable but weak
in scaffolding or clarity, a critic-rewriter revises it using evaluator feedback. If the response is incorrect,
unsafe, or still below threshold after revision, the query is escalated to the premium model.

3.4. Cascade policy via pedagogical rubric
Algorithm 1 summarizes the cascade mechnanism of model routing. FairTutor first generates and
evaluates a low-cost candidate. If 𝑄 ≥ 𝜏 and all critical dimensions pass, it returns the response. If
𝑄 ∈ [𝜏rewrite , 𝜏 ), it invokes the critic-rewriter and re-evaluates. If the revised response still fails, it
escalates to the premium model. To rigorously understand and evaluate the multi-agent system, we log
the trace of each agent’s reasoning and decision, API cost, evaluator score, and escalation path.
In the experiments, we set 𝜏 = 4.0 for general queries, 𝜏 = 4.2 for hard or high-risk queries, and
𝜏rewrite = 3.5. These heuristic thresholds instantiate Eq. 2 but are not claimed to be optimal. Sensitivity
analysis (Appendix C) shows that sweeping 𝜏 traces a smooth Pareto frontier: the default 𝜏 = 4.0
greatly lowers cost, while 𝜏 = 4.5 reaches near parity (within 𝑄±0.5) with premium model at moderate
additional cost. Systematic optimization of the FairTutor objective (Eq. 2) is left to future work.

4. Preliminary Experimental Evaluation
4.1. Benchmark and implementation status
We generate 50 realistic student queries following the design of the TutorAccessEval dataset (Appendix D), covering math, reading, writing, science, and language-learning tasks, with metadata for
grade level, difficulty, direct-answer risk, and expected pedagogy. Each routing system is evaluated on
the same 50 queries. The size and complexity of the evaluation will be extended in future work.
The systems are evaluated using the rubric in Table 3: correctness, conceptual clarity, scaffolding,
grade appropriateness, answer-leakage avoidance, empathy, safety, and weighted overall quality. We
use Qwen3-8B from OpenRouter API as the low-cost model [14], and use GPT-5 from OpenAI API as
the premium and evaluator model [16]. To estimate AI tutoring cost, we assume GPT-5 has 100× the
serving cost per input token and 75× per output token compared to Qwen3-8B, and compare each

Algorithm 1 FairTutor: evaluator-guided tutoring policy
Require: Student query 𝑥; low-cost tutor 𝑀𝑐 ; premium tutor 𝑀𝑝 ; evaluator 𝐸; quality threshold 𝜏 ;
rewrite threshold 𝜏𝑟
Ensure: Final tutoring response 𝑦
1: 𝑧 ← AnalyzeQuery(𝑥)
2: 𝑝 ← MakePedagogicalPlan(𝑥, 𝑧)
3: 𝑦𝑐 ← 𝑀𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑝)
4: 𝑠𝑐 ← 𝐸(𝑥, 𝑦𝑐 )
5: if PassesThresholds(𝑠𝑐 , 𝑥, 𝜏 ) then
6:
return 𝑦𝑐
7: end if
8: if IsRewriteCandidate(𝑠𝑐 , 𝜏𝑟 ) then
9:
𝑦𝑟 ← CriticRewrite(𝑥, 𝑦𝑐 , 𝑠𝑐 , 𝑝)
10:
𝑠𝑟 ← 𝐸(𝑥, 𝑦𝑟 )
11:
if PassesThresholds(𝑠𝑟 , 𝑥, 𝜏 ) then
12:
return 𝑦𝑟
13:
end if
14: end if
15: 𝑦𝑝 ← 𝑀𝑝 (𝑥, 𝑝)
16: return 𝑦𝑝
system to premium-only by the total number of input and output tokens [15, 17]. The reported cost is a
relative, token-weighted proxy, and excludes the cost of evaluating the final AI tutor responses.
GPT-5 serves as both premium reference tutor and final evaluator (routing itself uses the low-cost
evaluator), creating a possible self-consistency confound. As a robustness check, we re-scored all
250 responses with DeepSeek-V4 (Appendix B). The judge scores are moderately correlated (Pearson
𝑟 = 0.53, mean offset Δ = −0.006), the five-system ranking is preserved, and a paired bootstrap
shows FairTutor’s gap reduction over the low-cost tier is statistically sigificant. We therefore treat the
directional trends of FairTutor’s performance, not its exact magnitudes, as the robust finding, and will
perform additional evaluations on real-world student queries with expert annotations in future work.

4.2. Model routing system variants
We compare five tutoring systems:
1. Low-cost-only: always use the low-cost AI tutor to measure the baseline pedagogical quality.
2. Premium-only: always use the premium AI tutor to achieve the target pedagogical quality.
3. Naive difficulty router: use a rule-based difficulty route without evaluator-guided refinement.
4. Generic cascade router: generate with the low-cost model and escalate to the premium model
when evaluator scores fall below a fixed threshold.
5. FairTutor: use query analysis, pedagogical planning, low-cost generation, evaluator-guided
critique, and selective escalation to match the premium-only quality while lowering the cost.

4.3. Main results
Table 1 summarizes the pedagogical quality of the five systems. FairTutor achieves an average quality
score of 4.760, nearly matching premium-only quality of 4.874. By comparison, low-cost-only reaches
4.400, naive difficulty routing reaches 4.543, and generic cascade routing reaches 4.695. While we
construct internal routing systems for baseline comparisons in this WIP, future work will compare
against external routers such as RouteLLM and FrugalGPT (reviewed in Appendix E).
The gap is most visible in scaffolding, the dimension most critical to whether students learn to think
and reason rather than memorize answers: low-cost-only scores 3.640, naive difficulty routing scores

Table 1
Pedagogical quality of the five systems
(1–5 scale; Table 3). Premium-only is the reference target. SE is the
√
standard error of mean quality (𝜎/ 50). Future work will perform significance testing on a scaled benchmark.
Quality ↑

SE ↓

Correct. ↑

Scaffold. ↑

ΔAIED ↓

Premium-only (target)

4.874

0.023

5.000

4.640

0.000

Low-cost-only
Naive difficulty router
Generic cascade router
FairTutor

4.400
4.543
4.695
4.760

0.080
0.061
0.042
0.039

4.680
4.760
4.920
4.940

3.640
3.980
4.160
4.380

0.474
0.331
0.179
0.114

System

Table 2
Parity and efficiency metrics, with premium-only as reference. Serving cost is a relative token-weighted proxy
(premium generation 100× input / 75× output vs. low-cost; evaluator calls excluded). Escalation rate is the
fraction of queries served by the premium model.
Within 0.5 of Premium ↑

Serving cost ↓

Cost reduction ↑

Escal. Rate ↓

Premium-only (target)

100%

100%

0%

100%

Low-cost-only
Naive difficulty router
Generic cascade router
FairTutor

78%
72%
88%
92%

0.8%
39.7%
32.0%
28.4%

99.2%
60.3%
68.0%
71.6%

0%
34%
28%
18%

System

3.980, generic cascade routing scores 4.160, premium-only scores 4.640, and FairTutor scores 4.380.
The critic-guided revision mechanism in FairTutor effectively improves the pedagogical quality of the
low-cost model, while it does not fully close the gap with premium model. Overall, ΔAIED is reduced
from 0.474 for low-cost-only and 0.331 for naive difficulty routing to 0.114 for FairTutor.
Table 2 reports parity and cost efficiency metrics using premium-only as the reference target. FairTutor
scores within 0.5 quality points of premium-only on 92% of queries, compared with 78% for low-costonly and 88% for generic cascade. In addition, FairTutor also significantly reduces serving cost by 71.6%
while maintaining 97.1% of premium pedagogical quality and is the most cost-effective routing system.
The strongest baseline is generic cascade mechanism. Since FairTutor escalates less often than generic
cascade (18% vs. 28%), its serving cost (28.4%) is lower than the latter (32.0%) despite the extra calls to
low-cost models in the pedagogical planning and critic-guided revision steps.

4.4. Threshold sensitivity analysis
To investigate the effect of escalation threshold 𝜏 , we perform a hyperparameter sweep to analyze the
cost–quality Pareto frontier of FairTutor (Figure 2) in Appendix C). We find that FairTutor generates
a flexible cost–quality tradeoff that can satisfy the needs of diverse studnet populations. The default
𝜏 = 4.0 lowers the cost to 30% of premium while preserving 92% within-0.5 parity. Raising 𝜏 improves
quality, scaffolding, and parity along the Pareto frontier. At 𝜏 = 4.5, FairTutor reaches 100% within-0.5
parity, reduces ΔAIED to 0.082, and still costs about one third of premium-only. At 𝜏 ≈ 4.8, FairTutor
achieves higher average quality than premium-only while still lowering the cost by more than 20%.
One possible reason is that the escalation calls to premium model in FairTutor is planner-informed and
has stronger guidance to the premium model than a simple one-shot call in the premium-only variant.

5. Discussion, Ethical Considerations, and Future Work
We introduced FairTutor, an access-tier equity-aware model routing framework for budget-constrained
AI tutoring. FairTutor preserves pedagogical quality and lowers serving cost through evaluator-guided

response refinement and selective escalation to premium models. Empirical evaluations show that
FairTutor nearly matches premium-only quality while reducing the access-tier AIED Advantage Gap.
This WIP has several limitations to be addressed in future work. The final response evaluation uses
GPT-5 as both premium tutor and the response evaluator. Future work should use held-out evaluators,
educator annotation, and real-world student queries for rigorous evaluations. In addition, the TutorAccessEval benchmark is small, synthetic, and single-turn. Future work should scale TutorAccessEval,
add authentic multi-turn conversations, and learn the model routing policy by optimizing the FairTutor
objective. Finally, while this WIP focues on equity across access tiers of AI tutoring services, future
work should investigate the AI education equity across more diverse student demographics.

Declaration on Generative AI
During the preparation of this work, the author used ChatGPT for brainstorming, paper drafting and
editing, and code scaffolding, and used Claude Code for code implementation. The author reviewed and
edited the entire content and takes full responsibility for the publication’s content.

Code Availability
The source code is available under MIT License at https://github.com/qyxu1994/fairtutor-router.

Acknowledgements
The author thanks Xiaotong Chen and Jiangbo Wan for insightful discussions.

References
[1] S. Wang, T. Xu, H. Li, C. Zhang, J. Liang, J. Tang, P. S. Yu, and Q. Wen. Large language models for education: A survey and outlook. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 42(6):51–63, 2025.
arXiv:2403.18105. doi:10.1109/MSP.2025.3594309.
[2] Z. Chu, S. Wang, J. Xie, T. Zhu, Y. Yan, J. Ye, A. Zhong, X. Hu, J. Liang, P. S. Yu, and Q. Wen. LLM
agents for education: Advances and applications. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, pages 13782–13810, 2025. arXiv:2503.11733.
[3] L. Chen, M. Zaharia, and J. Zou. FrugalGPT: How to use large language models while reducing
cost and improving performance. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
[4] I. Ong, A. Almahairi, V. Wu, W.-L. Chiang, T. Wu, J. E. Gonzalez, M. W. Kadous, and I. Stoica.
RouteLLM: Learning to route LLMs with preference data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18665, 2024.
[5] J. Dekoninck, M. Baader, and M. Vechev. A unified approach to routing and cascading for LLMs.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. arXiv:2410.10347.
[6] E. Kasneci, K. Seßler, S. Küchemann, M. Bannert, D. Dementieva, F. Fischer, U. Gasser, G. Groh, S.
Günnemann, E. Hüllermeier, S. Krusche, G. Kutyniok, T. Michaeli, C. Nerdel, J. Pfeffer, O. Poquet,
M. Sailer, A. Schmidt, T. Seidel, M. Stadler, J. Weller, J. Kuhn, and G. Kasneci. ChatGPT for good?
On opportunities and challenges of large language models for education. Learning and Individual
Differences, 103:102274, 2023. doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2023.102274.
[7] J. Lee, Y. Hicke, R. Yu, C. Brooks, and R. F. Kizilcec. The life cycle of large language models
in education: A framework for understanding sources of bias. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 55(5):1982–2002, 2024. doi:10.1111/bjet.13505.
[8] I. Delikoura, Y. R. Fung, and P. Hui. From superficial outputs to superficial learning: Risks of large
language models in education. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21972, 2025.
[9] W. Holmes, K. Porayska-Pomsta, K. Holstein, E. Sutherland, T. Baker, S. B. Shum, O. C. Santos,
M. T. Rodrigo, M. Cukurova, I. I. Bittencourt, and K. R. Koedinger. Ethics of AI in education:
Towards a community-wide framework. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
32(3):504–526, 2022. doi:10.1007/s40593-021-00239-1.
[10] B. S. Bloom. The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective as
one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6):4–16, 1984. doi:10.3102/0013189X013006004.
[11] K. VanLehn. The relative effectiveness of human tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems, and other
tutoring systems. Educational Psychologist, 46(4):197–221, 2011. doi:10.1080/00461520.2011.611369.
[12] M. Warschauer. Technology and Social Inclusion: Rethinking the Digital Divide. MIT Press, 2003.
[13] J. D. Hansen and J. Reich. Democratizing education? Examining access and usage patterns in
massive open online courses. Science, 350(6265):1245–1248, 2015. doi:10.1126/science.aab3782.
[14] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv, C. Zheng, D.
Liu, F. Zhou, F. Huang, F. Hu, H. Ge, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Tang, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang,

J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, L. Deng, M. Li, M. Xue, M. Li, P. Zhang, P.
Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Gao, S. Liu, S. Luo, T. Li, T. Tang, W. Yin, X. Ren, X. Wang, X. Zhang, X.
Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and Z.
Qiu. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[15] OpenRouter. Qwen: Qwen3 8B — API pricing and providers. OpenRouter Model Pricing Page, 2026.
https://openrouter.ai/qwen/qwen3-8b. Accessed May 7, 2026. Listed pricing: $0.05 per million
input tokens and $0.40 per million output tokens.
[16] OpenAI. GPT-5 system card. OpenAI Technical Report, 2025. https://openai.com/index/
gpt-5-system-card/. Published August 13, 2025.
[17] OpenAI. OpenAI API pricing. OpenAI API Documentation, 2026. https://openai.com/api/pricing/.
Accessed May 7, 2026. Listed prices are per million tokens and may change over time.

A. Pedagogical Evaluation Rubric
Table 3
Evaluator dimensions used to estimate pedagogical quality. All dimensions are estimated on a Likert scale from
1 to 5.
Dimension

Description

Correctness
Conceptual clarity
Scaffolding
Grade appropriateness
Answer-leakage avoidance
Empathy
Safety

The response is factually and logically correct.
The explanation is clear and coherent.
The response helps the student reason rather than only giving answers.
Language and examples fit the specified learner level.
The response avoids inappropriate direct solution disclosure.
Tone is encouraging and supportive.
Response avoids harmful, misleading, or overconfident guidance.

B. Robustness Check: Independent DeepSeek-V4 Evaluator
Because GPT-5 serves as both the premium reference tutor and the final evaluator in the main experiment
(§4), the reported scores could in principle reflect an evaluator self-preference rather than genuine
pedagogical quality. To test this, we re-scored all 250 (query, response) pairs with DeepSeek-V4 as an
independent judge, using the identical rubric (Table 3) and prompt, without any new tutoring calls.
Table 4 reports the resulting pedagogical quality.
Across all 250 pairs, GPT-5 and DeepSeek-V4 overall scores are positively correlated (Pearson 𝑟 =
0.53) with a negligible mean offset (Δ = −0.006 on the 1–5 scale), indicating no systematic global bias
between the two judges. More importantly for our claims, the qualitative ranking of the five systems is
preserved: premium-only > FairTutor > generic cascade > naive difficulty router > low-cost-only. The
ΔAIED ordering is likewise monotone, and FairTutor again attains the smallest access-tier gap (0.142)
among the budget-constrained systems, while its scaffolding score (4.080) remains the highest of the
non-premium systems. We therefore treat the main-text quantitative values as directional estimates
whose ordering is robust to the choice of LLM judge. We note that the absolute pedagogical-quality
differences compress somewhat under DeepSeek-V4 (e.g., the premium-only score drops from 4.874 to
4.811), which is why we report the ranking, rather than the exact magnitudes, as the robust finding.
To quantify the small-sample uncertainty directly, we computed paired bootstrap 95% confidence
intervals over the 50 queries (10,000 resamples; scripts/bootstrap_ci.py). FairTutor’s gain over
generic cascade in overall quality is +0.065 with a 95% CI of [−0.040, +0.168], i.e. not yet statistically
resolved at 𝑛 = 50—consistent with the small Table 1 margin and the caption’s call for significance
testing on a scaled benchmark. By contrast, FairTutor’s per-query quality improvement over low-costonly (equivalently, its reduction of the access-tier gap relative to the low-cost tier) is +0.360 with a 95%
CI of [+0.203, +0.533], which excludes zero. The robust claim is therefore that FairTutor substantially
closes the gap to premium relative to the low-cost baseline; its margin over the strongest internal
comparison system is directionally positive but awaits a larger benchmark.

C. Routing-Threshold Sensitivity Analysis
The cascade in Algorithm 1 is governed by two thresholds: the acceptance threshold 𝜏 and the rewriteband threshold 𝜏rewrite . To characterize how these thresholds shape the cost–quality tradeoff, we
conduct a controlled sensitivity analysis. Because the cascade is deterministic given the candidate
evaluator scores, we materialize all three candidate branches for every query once—the low-cost
response, the critic-rewritten response, and the premium escalation, each with its evaluator score and
token-level cost—and then replay the routing logic offline for every threshold setting at zero additional

Table 4
Pedagogical quality under an independent DeepSeek-V4 evaluator (ablation; cf. Table 1). All 250 responses
re-scored with the identical
√ rubric. Quality, correctness, and scaffolding are on a 1–5 scale; SE is the standard
error of mean quality (𝜎/ 50).
Quality ↑

SE ↓

Correct. ↑

Scaffold. ↑

ΔAIED ↓

Premium-only (target)

4.811

0.041

5.000

4.340

0.000

Low-cost-only
Naive difficulty router
Generic cascade router
FairTutor

4.534
4.595
4.632
4.669

0.064
0.074
0.055
0.067

4.920
4.860
4.980
4.920

3.500
3.920
3.800
4.080

0.277
0.216
0.179
0.142

System

generation cost. This holds the generations fixed while varying only the thresholds, isolating the policy’s
sensitivity from generation sampling noise. Cost follows the same token-weighted methodology as
Table 2 (premium generation weighted 100× input and 75× output relative to the low-cost tier; the
in-pipeline evaluator runs on the low-cost tier).
We first find that 𝜏rewrite is non-binding on this benchmark: across 𝜏rewrite ∈ [3.0, 3.8] the metrics are
unchanged, because the rewrite decision is governed by the scaffolding gate (IsRewriteCandidate) and
the hard-query escalation guard rather than by the band’s lower edge. We therefore fix 𝜏rewrite = 3.5
and sweep 𝜏 (Table 5, Figure 2).
Quality, scaffolding, and premium-parity rise monotonically with 𝜏 , tracing a smooth Pareto frontier.
The default 𝜏 = 4.0 is a deliberately cost-favoring operating point (serving cost ≈ 30% of premium).
Raising 𝜏 first converts borderline low-cost acceptances into critic-rewrites rather than premium
escalations, so quality and parity improve while the escalation rate stays roughly flat: at 𝜏 = 4.5,
FairTutor attains 100% within-0.5 parity and halves the access-tier gap (ΔAIED from 0.144 to 0.082)
while still serving at roughly a third of the premium cost and escalating only 22% of queries. Beyond
𝜏 ≈ 4.6 the escalation rate climbs steeply and returns diminish: 𝜏 = 4.7 drives ΔAIED to zero but at
44% of premium cost, and 𝜏 ≥ 4.9 escalates a majority of queries for negligible additional savings.
At the highest thresholds ΔAIED becomes slightly negative—FairTutor’s evaluator-guided rewriting
marginally exceeds single-shot premium quality on this set—consistent with the failure-mode finding
(§4) that premium-only generation is not itself optimal. The default cell closely tracks the main-text
FairTutor row (quality 4.730 vs. 4.760; serving cost 30.0% vs. 28.4%), the small residual reflecting
the independent re-materialization of candidates; we therefore report the sweep as a self-contained
sensitivity analysis whose relative trends, rather than absolute magnitudes, are the finding. Because the
materialization captures a single sample per stage, the analysis matches the single-sample design of the
main experiment.
Table 5
Routing-threshold sensitivity (𝜏 swept, 𝜏rewrite = 3.5 fixed). Offline replay over the 50-query benchmark using
the same cost methodology as Table 2. The 𝜏 = 4.0 row is the default configuration; results for 𝜏 ∈ {4.0, 4.1, 4.2}
are identical and shown once. Quality and scaffolding are on a 1–5 scale; serving cost is relative to premium-only.
𝜏

Quality ↑

Scaffold. ↑

ΔAIED ↓

Within 0.5 ↑

Escal. ↓

Cost ↓

4.0 (default)
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8

4.730
4.747
4.770
4.792
4.834
4.874
4.890

4.320
4.340
4.400
4.440
4.500
4.560
4.620

0.144
0.127
0.104
0.082
0.040
0.000
–0.016

92%
96%
98%
100%
100%
100%
98%

18%
18%
20%
22%
28%
30%
42%

30.0%
30.1%
32.0%
33.9%
41.4%
43.9%
60.1%

Figure 2: Cost–quality (left) and cost–ΔAIED (right) Pareto frontier as the acceptance threshold 𝜏 is swept
(𝜏rewrite = 3.5). The default 𝜏 = 4.0 favors cost; 𝜏 = 4.5 (circled) reaches full within-0.5 parity at roughly a third
of the premium serving cost. Premium-only (⋆) and generic cascade (♦, at its own serving cost) are shown for
reference; the FairTutor frontier lies above and to the left of generic cascade in both panels, indicating it attains
higher quality and a smaller gap at comparable cost.

D. TutorAccessEval Query Dataset
TutorAccessEval is a compact diagnostic benchmark designed to evaluate whether AI tutoring systems
provide not only correct answers, but also pedagogically appropriate support. The 50-query version used
in this WIP paper contains student-style queries across six subject categories: math, reading, writing,
science, language, and general study-help tasks. Each query is represented as a JSON object with the
following fields: a unique identifier, subject, grade level, difficulty level, student query, a Boolean flag
indicating whether the system should avoid giving the direct answer, an expected pedagogy description,
and a list of risk tags.

D.1. Example TutorAccessEval Item
{
"id": "math_001",
"subject": "math",
"grade_level": "middle school",
"difficulty": "medium",
"student_query": "I don’t understand why dividing by a fraction means multiplying by
the reciprocal. Can you explain?",
"should_avoid_direct_answer": true,
"expected_pedagogy": "Use a concrete example, visual intuition, and one check-forunderstanding question.",
"risk_tags": ["misconception", "math_reasoning"]
}

D.2. Dataset composition
Table 6 summarizes the composition of the 50-query evaluation set. The dataset intentionally balances
answer-seeking and learning-oriented queries: 25 queries are marked as cases where the tutor should
avoid giving the direct answer, and 25 allow a direct answer with concise explanation. This design
tests whether a system can adapt to different pedagogical contexts rather than always following a fixed
tutoring style.

Table 6
Composition of the 50-query TutorAccessEval dataset used in the WIP evaluation.
Attribute

Category

Count

Subject

Math
Reading
Writing
Science
Language
General

10
9
9
9
9
4

Grade level

Elementary
Middle school
High school

17
21
12

Difficulty

Easy
Medium
Hard

20
13
17

Direct-answer avoidance

True
False

25
25

The subject distribution is approximately balanced while preserving a small set of general tutoring
cases. The grade-level distribution emphasizes elementary and middle-school tutoring, where scaffolding, age appropriateness, and answer-leakage avoidance are especially important. The difficulty
distribution includes a substantial number of hard cases to stress-test routing decisions and escalation
behavior.

D.3. Important dataset features
TutorAccessEval is designed around several features that are central to AI tutoring evaluation. First,
each item includes an expected_pedagogy field, which specifies the desired teaching strategy rather
than only the desired final answer. For example, some math items ask the tutor to guide the student
through inverse operations or visual reasoning; reading items may ask for contrastive examples and
a check-for-understanding; writing and language items may require outlines, sentence frames, or
grammar-focused scaffolding.
Second, the dataset includes explicit direct-answer-avoidance labels. This is important because
good tutoring behavior is context-dependent. In some cases, such as a student asking for a short
factual answer, directness is appropriate. In other cases, such as homework completion, proof-writing,
translation, or essay generation, the tutor should guide the learner without completing the task for
them. This distinction allows the evaluator to penalize both unwanted answer leakage and overly
indirect responses when a direct answer is appropriate.
Third, each item includes risk tags that identify pedagogical or safety-relevant concerns. The most
common tags include misconception, homework completion, homework dependency, writing feedback,
science facts, math reasoning, reading comprehension, language grammar, and academic integrity.
These tags help analyze whether failures concentrate in particular types of tutoring interactions. For
instance, the case studies include academic-integrity-sensitive essay writing, direct-answer science
worksheets, wholesale translation requests, and science misconception repair.

D.4. Limitations
TutorAccessEval is intended as a preliminary diagnostic benchmark, not a validated measure of student
learning. It has several limitations. First, the dataset is small: 50 queries are sufficient for a WIP
demonstration but not enough to establish robust subject-level conclusions. Second, the queries are
synthetic or manually curated rather than collected from real tutoring sessions. As a result, they may

not fully capture the ambiguity, emotional context, multilingual phrasing, or persistence patterns found
in authentic student interactions. Third, the dataset focuses on single-turn tutoring. Many important
tutoring behaviors, such as adaptive hinting, misconception tracking, and gradual fading of support,
require multi-turn evaluation.
Fourth, the benchmark currently lacks demographic, accessibility, and socioeconomic context. This is
a limitation for an equity-focused paper: the current access-tier AI Education Advantage Gap measures
quality differences across access tiers, not across real learner populations. Fifth, the dataset does not
include human teacher annotations or student learning-gain measurements. The expected pedagogy
field provides a useful rubric target, but it should eventually be validated by educators. Finally, the
subject distribution is broad but shallow; each domain has only a small number of examples, and some
important educational settings, such as multilingual learners, special education, early literacy, and
culturally grounded instruction, are underrepresented.

D.5. Future work
Future versions of TutorAccessEval should expand in four directions. First, the dataset should scale
to hundreds or thousands of queries with balanced coverage across subjects, grade levels, difficulty
levels, and tutoring risks. Second, it should include multi-turn tutoring trajectories so that systems can
be evaluated on hint progression, student uptake, recovery from misunderstanding, and when to stop
scaffolding. Third, future data collection should involve teachers, students, and caregivers to produce
more authentic query distributions and human-validated pedagogy labels. Fourth, the benchmark
should add equity-relevant slices, such as low-literacy prompts, multilingual learners, low-resource
curricula, accessibility needs, and different levels of prior knowledge.
A stronger future benchmark would also include paired evaluation targets: one target for correctness
and another for pedagogical appropriateness. This would allow researchers to distinguish systems that
know the answer from systems that teach well. Finally, future releases should include richer metadata
for cost and deployment constraints, enabling more direct evaluation of cost-aware and equity-aware
routing policies in realistic educational settings.

E. Related Work
E.1. Large language models for education
LLMs are increasingly used for educational tasks such as generating explanations, giving formative
feedback, supporting writing revision, and answering student questions [6, 7, 1, 2]. Prior work emphasizes both the promise and risk of LLMs in learning contexts: they can personalize instruction and
expand access, but they can also hallucinate, over-scaffold, provide direct answers, or widen existing
inequities [6, 8]. These concerns motivate evaluation criteria beyond correctness, including scaffolding,
age appropriateness, learner agency, and fairness.

E.2. Cost-aware LLM routing and cascading
LLM routing systems select among multiple models or tools to optimize performance under constraints.
FrugalGPT proposes prompt adaptation, LLM approximation, and LLM cascading to reduce cost while
preserving accuracy [3]. RouteLLM learns routers from preference data to select between stronger and
weaker models [4]. Other routing and cascading frameworks analyze when sequential escalation or
direct model selection is most effective [5]. Our work builds on this literature but changes the objective:
instead of optimizing generic response quality, we optimize pedagogical quality under an access-tier
quality constraint. Direct comparison to FrugalGPT and RouteLLM adapted to pedagogical tutoring—
using our multi-dimensional rubric as the preference signal—is the primary planned experiment for the
full version. The key architectural distinction we anticipate is that existing cascade methods optimize a
single quality score and lack the multi-dimensional pedagogical rubric and the critic-rewriter stage. We

cannot fairly compare against them in the current WIP without re-implementing their routing logic
with pedagogical signals, which we leave to future work.

E.3. Access-Tier Quality Gap and the AI Education Divide
AI in education can either reduce or amplify inequalities depending on deployment context, access,
and system design [9, 6]. The relevant disparity is not only whether students have access to an AI tool,
but whether the tool provides comparably useful learning support. In this paper, we operationalize
this concern through an access-tier quality gap. Our approach is related to fairness-aware machine
learning, but the unit of analysis is the tutoring interaction: for comparable student queries, how far
is a budget-constrained response from the premium response in pedagogical quality? Demographic
operationalization of equity—e.g., Warschauer’s digital-divide framework [12] or Reich’s analysis of
MOOC equity [13]—remains an important direction that we do not address in this WIP.

F. Qualitative Evaluation Results
F.1. Naive-router parity anomaly
The naive difficulty router attains lower within-0.5-of-premium parity (72%) than low-cost-only (78%)
despite higher mean quality (§4). Of the 9 queries where low-cost-only was within 0.5 of premium but
the naive router was not, 5 are easy, 3 are medium, and 1 is hard—skewed toward the easy and medium
queries that the naive router leaves unguarded by sending only hard queries to premium. This confirms
that routing on difficulty alone raises the mean while widening the distribution, so mean quality is an
insufficient parity metric.

F.2. Failure mode analysis
We analyze the common failure modes of each system across the 50 queries. Low-cost-only responses
were most frequently flagged for weak scaffolding (18 cases), direct-answer leakage (7 cases), and
incomplete responses (6 cases). Naive difficulty routing showed a similar pattern (weak scaffolding
13, direct-answer leakage 7, incomplete 6). These indicate that the low-cost model does not reliably
provide high pedagogical quality. Generic cascade reduces several failure modes but still produces
weak scaffolding (10 cases) and incomplete responses (5 cases). FairTutor produces the fewest logged
failures: direct-answer leakage (3), incorrect facts (2), and weak scaffolding (1). Premium-only also has
pedagogical failures (scoring 4.874 out of 5), including direct-answer leakage and incomplete responses,
so the premium model alone does not guarantee optimal pedagogical behavior; its responses also benefit
from rigorous evaluation and critic refinement.

F.3. Case studies
The case studies illustrate how FairTutor improves tutoring behavior. In a high-risk language-learning
query, the student asked the system to write an entire five-paragraph essay comparing The Giver and
Fahrenheit 451. low-cost-only scored 2.35 because it supplied an overly complete essay scaffold with
likely fabricated or misattributed quotes and precise page numbers, creating both direct-answer leakage
and factual risk. FairTutor escalated after evaluation and scored 5.00 by refusing to write the whole
essay, offering thesis options, an outline, sentence frames, quote prompts, MLA guidance, and a timing
plan while explicitly instructing the student to verify evidence and produce original writing.
In an elementary science query asking whether the Sun is a star, planet, or moon, low-cost-only
immediately gave away the answer and included the inaccurate claim that the Sun is not orbiting
anything, resulting in a score of 2.95. FairTutor scored 4.70 by giving a hint based on self-generated light,
prompting the student to choose and explain, and asking follow-up questions. The remaining deduction
came from an indirect clue that another star besides the Sun could reveal the answer, highlighting a
useful future improvement for answer-leakage detection.

In a French translation query, the student asked for a wholesale translation of a sentence. low-costonly scored 3.10 because it gave most of the translation directly and included a confusing explanation
of agreement. FairTutor used critic rewriting and scored 5.00 by breaking the sentence into subject,
verb, location, time, and idiomatic-expression chunks, explaining key grammar rules, asking checkfor-understanding questions, and inviting the student to assemble the final translation. This example
shows how evaluator-guided revision can transform an answer-giving response into a learning-oriented
tutoring interaction.
In a science misconception query about Moon phases, low-cost-only correctly distinguished phases
from eclipses but gave a misleading physical model that could accidentally demonstrate Earth-shadow
eclipses rather than normal lunar phases. FairTutor scored 5.00 by directly surfacing the misconception,
explaining that phases depend on how much of the Moon’s sunlit half we see, and proposing a lampand-ball model in which the ball moves around the student’s head with a slight tilt to avoid accidental
eclipses. This case demonstrates that FairTutor can improve both conceptual correctness and hands-on
activity design.

